Procter R. Hug, Jr 


Interviewee: Procter R. Hug, Jr. 
Interviewed: 1995-1996; 2008 
Published: 2013 
Interviewer: Brad Williams 
UNOHP Catalog #229 


Description 

Procter Ralph Hug Jr., Senior U.S. Circuit Judge for the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, was born March 
11, 1931, in Reno, Nevada. He has made a lasting mark on Nevada’s institutional, legal, and judicial history. His 
memory of early influences is a harbinger of his success as a high school debate champion. Judge Hug excelled in 
sports, academics, and civic activities at Sparks High School, and the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR), where he 
followed in his father’s footsteps as Student Body President. 

After serving as a lieutenant in the U.S. Navy (1954-55), and marrying Barbara Van Meter, Hug graduated from 
Stanford Law School (1958). He returned to Nevada to practice law in Reno’s then-small legal community. A 
“Kennedy” Democrat, Judge Hug involved himself in civic and political life, including several elected terms as a 
member of the Nevada Board of Regents. 

In 1977, President Jimmy Carter nominated Judge Hug to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit. The 
story of his selection is a lesson in Nevada judicial political history. Judge Hug has been an “agent of change.” His 
accomplishments include drafting the framework for Nevada’s present-day Gaming Control Act, and, as a Nevada 
Regent, working to establish the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, the UNR School of Medicine, and the National 
Judicial College. 

Judge Hug recalls significant cases and opinions, his role models, and his judicial philosophy. In 1996, he was 
elevated to chief judge of the court, a post he held until 2000. His thoughts on being chief judge of a large federal 
circuit court reveal a close-up view of an able administrator and a vigilant guardian of the court. 

The oral history interviews with the Honorable Procter Ralph Hug Jr. were part of the Nevada Legal Oral History 
Project, a joint effort of the Nevada Judicial Historical Society, the Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical Society, and the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program. 



Procter R. Hug, Jr. 




Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


An Oral History Conducted by Brad Williams 
Edited by Patricia A. Cooper-Smith 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 2013 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp@unr.edu 
http: / / www.unr.edu/ oralhistory 

Nevada Judicial Historical Society 
Carson City, Nevada 89701 

Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical Society 
Pasadena, California 91105 


All rights reserved. Published 2013. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 

Director: Alicia Barber 
Production Assistant: Karen Frazier 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words maybe quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface ix 

Introduction xi 

1. Childhood, Youth and Family 1 

2. University Life and Career Choices 13 

3. U.S. Navy, Marriage, and Stanford Law School 21 

4. Early Law Practice in Reno 27 

5. State Politics and the Gaming Control Act 35 

6. The Nevada Board of Regents 41 

7. Nevada Telephone Company 51 

8. Woodburn, Forman, Wedge, Blakey, Folsom & Plug 55 

9. American Bar Association 63 

67 


10. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 

11. Preparing for Oral Argument, Conferences, and Opinion Writing 


77 



Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


viii 

12. The Circuit Split Controversy 81 

13. Significant Cases 85 

14. The Chief Judgeship 107 

15. Changes in the Ninth Circuit 113 

16. Judicial Philosophy and Challenges for the Judiciary 125 

17. Concluding Thoughts 131 



Preface 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 



Introduction 


Procter R. Hug Jr., a native Nevadan, has 
made a lasting mark on Nevada’s institutional, 
legal, and judicial history. Born March 
11, 1931, in Reno, he describes an “ideal 
childhood,” with parents who nurtured and 
encouraged a bright, busy, and optimistic 
child. Judge Hug’s memory of early teachers 
is an early harbinger of his success as a high 
school debate champion—fertile ground for 
the future lawyer and judge. He represented 
Sparks High School at Boys State and 
Boys Nation, meeting President Truman in 
Washington, D.C. He excelled in sports and 
civic activities in high school and college at 
the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR). At 
UNR, he followed in his father’s footsteps as 
Student Body President, graduating in 1953. 
Throughout Judge Hug’s retelling of his early 
life, he is humble and appreciative of his 
advantages and opportunities. 

After service as a lieutenant in the U.S. 
Navy (1954-55) and marrying his high school 
sweetheart, Barbara Van Meter, he enrolled 
at Stanford Law School (1958), where he was 


on the law review. Hug took an opportunity 
to take the Nevada bar examination early, 
passed, and returned for his last part of law 
school a “celebrity among the law students” 
who still had a bar exam ahead of them. 

Judge Hug is a good storyteller of law 
practice circa 1959 and through the 1960s, 
the period after he returned to Reno to 
practice law. His stories of Reno’s then-small 
legal community, divorce work, and learning 
how to use demonstrative evidence such 
as a skeleton in a box to prove his case, are 
informative and often humorous. Judge Hug 
involved himself in civic and political life as 
his law practice and young family grew. He 
was active in the state’s “Young Democrats” 
and enjoyed taking on “the old guard.” 

It is a clarifying moment when his 
interviewer observes that Judge Hug, in 
his life and career, appears to be an “agent 
of change.” Judge Hug’s accomplishments 
include drafting the framework for Nevada’s 
present-day Gaming Control Act, and, as 
a Nevada Regent, working to establish the 



Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


xii 


University of Nevada Las Vegas, the UNR 
School of Medicine, and the National Judicial 
College. His engagement in establishing 
these now-mainstream Nevada institutions is 
related with the quiet pride of an honorable 
man. 

In 1977, President Jimmy Carter 
nominated Judge Hug to a seat on the 
United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
Circuit. His recollection of his selection is a 
lesson in Nevada judicial political history. His 
confirmation by the United States Senate was 
seamless. In the process he realized that he 
had “always wanted to be a judge.” 

Judge Hug recalls his early days and cases 
as a circuit judge, the always-heavy caseload, 
his role models, and his judicial philosophy. 
He sees himself as a centrist, and tries “to look 
at what happened to the individual” asking 
himself, “What is the story?” He sees judicial 
activism as “in the eye of the beholder,” and 
the U.S. Constitution as a “living document” 
that is “evolving.” Ever present in his mind 
were the serious attempts by Congress to 
split the Ninth Circuit. A strong advocate of 
keeping the Ninth Circuit intact, Judge Hug is 
a defender of the court as an innovative body 
that has worked hard to resolve problems 
with always too few judges and overly large 
caseloads. 

In 1996, Judge Hug was elevated to Chief 
Judge of the Ninth Circuit, a post he held 
until 2000. His oral history is a close view of 
an able administrator and a vigilant guardian 
of the court. His goals are clear: to keep the 
circuit together; to fill judicial vacancies; 
to streamline court efficiency; and to serve 
the federal district court, bankruptcy, and 
magistrate judges in the circuit. Judge Hug 
reviews significant cases and opinions in 
a thirty-one year judicial career, which is 
ongoing as of this writing, with an acute 


memory for detail. A reader can readily 
see the hand of a judge skilled in the art of 
persuasion. 

At the close of his oral history, Judge Hug 
acknowledges the importance of his family: 
his wife, Barbara, a partner throughout every 
facet of his career; his children—a doctor, 
lawyer, and teacher; and his grandchildren. 

Brad Williams conducted oral history 
interviews with the Honorable Procter Ralph 
Hug Jr. in 1995 and 1996, with additional 
interviews in May 2008, in his chambers in 
Pasadena, California, and in Reno, Nevada. 
These interviews were conducted as part of 
the Nevada Legal Oral History Project, a joint 
effort of the Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical 
Society (NJCHS), the Nevada Judicial 
Historical Society (NJHS), and the UNOHP. 
Begun in 2001, the project was intended to 
record the life stories of leading members of 
Nevada’s legal profession and to educate the 
public about law and the courts by making 
those stories widely available through various 
media. 

Members of the boards of NJHS and 
NJCHS compiled and vetted lists of potential 
narrators, ultimately selecting representatives 
from both the state and federal benches and 
bars. The UNOHP, under the direction of 
Tom King and his successor Mary Larson, 
recommended interviewers, most of whom 
were professional oral historians, and donated 
equipment and transcription services. Brad 
Williams, of NJCHS, coordinated the project 
from its inception. Susan Southwick, of NJHS, 
oversaw that group’s participation. Patricia 
Cooper-Smith completed the copyediting 
and introductions. Alicia Barber, Director 
of the UNOHP since 2009, supervised the 
project’s final publication and dissemination. 
The project was made possible by a generous 
challenge grant from the John Ben Snow 



Introduction 


xiii 


Memorial Trust, with matching funds 
provided by the U.S. District Court for 
Nevada Attorney Admissions Fund, the 
Washoe County Courthouse Preservation 
Fund, and the Nevada State Bar. Thanks go to 
Susan Southwick and the Board of Trustees of 
NJHS, and to Brad Williams, who interviewed 
Judge Hug. 

Patricia A. Cooper-Smith 
Carson City, Nevada 
April 2013 





Hon. Procter R. Hug, upon appointment 
as a U. S. Circuit Judge, U. S. Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit, 1977. 



Hon. Procter R. Hug, upon elevation to 
Chief Judge, U. S. Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit, 1996. 


(Photographs courtesy of Procter R. Hug) 





1 

Childhood, Youth and Family 


Brad Williams. This is Brad Williams. Today 
is December 14, 1995. I’m sitting in the U.S. 
Court of Appeals Building in Pasadena, and 
I’m here to interview Judge Procter Hug Jr. 
Your Honor, for the record, would you state 
your name? 

Procter R. Hug, Jr.: Yes. Procter Ralph 
Hug, Jr. 

Thank you. And maybe you could just tell us 
where and when you were born. 

I was born on March 11, 1931, in St. 
Mary’s Hospital, in Reno, Nevada. 

Obviously you don’t remember the 
circumstances [laughter], but maybe you can 
tell me a little bit about your parents. 

Sure. My father was born in Oregon but 
as a teenager, I think he was probably about 
thirteen or fourteen, he moved to Tonopah, 
Nevada, with his mother and her second 


husband, Mr. Kind, and went to high school 
in Tonopah, Nevada. He was an outstanding 
athlete there, and then he went to the 
University of Nevada, where he was also a 
very outstanding athlete, particularly football. 
He then was elected student body president 
of the University of Nevada and he became 
a coach. He coached at Sparks High School 
and later became principal of the high school 
and superintendent of the schools in Sparks, 
Nevada, and then ultimately Superintendent 
of Schools for Washoe County. 

My mother was born in Kansas but moved 
to Ely, Nevada, when she was about two years 
old and went to high school there and also 
went to the University of Nevada, where they 
met. I remember my dad saying that she was 
the prettiest girl he’d ever seen when he saw 
her coming down the stairs for their first date. 
She taught for a year and they were married 
right after that and lived in Sparks, Nevada. 
She was a big help to him always in dozens of 
ways, but one of them, for example, would be 
in coaching. She would always keep the charts. 



2 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


In basketball games, she would show all the 
shots, keep track of the plays and so forth, so 
she was always a real fine helpmate. 

Did you develop your interest in sports from 
your father’s interest? 

Indeed I did. One of my earliest 
memories as a child was that I was the mascot 
for the team; I was just a little guy, probably 
about three or four years old and they bought 
me a football suit; I would be down on the 
bench with my dad when he was coaching 
and theyd always ask at the rallies for me to 
make a speech and I usually would say a few 
things at the bonfire rallies and so forth. That 
was very exciting and that’s one of the reasons 
I wanted to be a very good athlete, if I could. 

Do you still consider yourself an athlete? 

Sure. Yes. 

What kinds of things do you like to participate 
in? 

Now or earlier? 

Now. 

Well, I like snow skiing, water skiing, 
sailing, and tennis, and those actually, are 
probably the sports now. I’ve been a little bit 
handicapped in the last year because I had a 
knee injury, but other than that those things 
are probably the most interesting. 

As a boy growing up in Nevada, what kind of 
sports did you participate in? 

I played football, basketball, and track. I 
lettered in all those sports in high school. I 
think my best sport was track. I was a hurdler 


and one of the things that always tickled me 
the most looking back was, in my senior 
year, I kind of gained a lot of speed and at the 
interclass meet—there are fourteen events in 
track—and I won seven of them. 

Oh my. Is there an award for best all-around 
athlete or anything like that, I mean did you 
walk away with the trophies? 

Well, not at that particular meet. I did get 
a little trophy for being the outstanding track 
athlete that year. I tied the Northern Nevada 
high hurdle record. 

Oh that’s great. Do you still like to watch track, 
do you still go to track meets? 

Yes, oh yes, yes I do. I’ve gone to the 
Olympics twice, once in Mexico City and once 
in Los Angeles, and yes, I’m very interested 
in it. And watching all other sports. I’m a real 
fan of University of Nevada basketball and 
football games. I go to all of them I can. 

Do you have brothers and sisters? 

I have two sisters. 

And where do you fit into the scheme of things? 

I’m the oldest. One sister is three and a 
half years younger than I am, and the other 
is eight years younger. 

Do you remember your grandparents? 

I do. One grandparent, my mother’s father, 
Frank Beverly, died when I was about six, but 
I do remember him. And then my mother’s 
mother came to live with us, and she lived 
with us from that time on until, well she lived 
there the rest of her life really, with my folks, 



Childhood, Youth and Family 


3 


but she lived there all the time when I was 
growing up. 

That was Grandmother Beverly? 

Grandmother Beverly. 

What was her first name? What did you call 
her? 

I called her Nan, but her name was Grace, 
Grace Beverly. 

And your fathers parents? 

My father’s parents. His mother was 
divorced when he was an early age, probably 
eight or ten, something like that. His father, 
then, really didn’t have an awful lot to do 
with him. He was a nice enough fellow, but 
he just moved away, that’s when she moved 
to Tonopah, and it was after the divorce, 
she owned and ran a hat shop. My father’s 
father lived in another community so I 
didn’t see him that much. She remarried Mr. 
J. Clarence Kind, a wonderful fellow, and a 
very kind person. He really was, in effect, my 
grandfather for all the time I knew. He was a 
wonderful man. Both grandparents we were 
quite close to. We saw a lot of them. They lived 
in Reno, Nevada, and we lived in Sparks. They 
were two separate communities at that time, 
about three miles apart. They’ve now grown 
together. You don’t know when you’ve left one 
and gotten into the other. 

What was you father’s mother’s first name? 

Ella. 

What was her maiden name? Do you know? 
Procter. 


Procter. Well, that leads to a natural question. 
How did you get your first name? 

That’s how I got my first name. 

I see. 

My father’s name is Procter and that’s how 
we get the name, from her maiden name. 

It sounds like a solid, all-American name to me. 

Yes, it’s an unusual name for a first name. 

I think it is an unusual first name. Did you take 
kidding as a child about that? 

Not really. You would think so because it is 
so unusual, but it was just kind of an accepted 
name and all of my life I was called Proc. It 
was kind of an advantage because it was an 
unusual name so everyone remembered it. 

That’s good. So you were born in 1931, grew 
up in Sparks. What was it like growing up in 
Sparks? 

Sparks was a small community. It was, 
during the time I was growing up, it was 
probably growing from about three thousand 
to five thousand. Five thousand people by 
about the time I graduated from high school. 
It was a typical, kind of a slow, very friendly 
small community where everyone knew each 
other, had lots of holiday celebrations that 
were big events in all of our lives, whether 
it was Labor Day or whether it was the 
established celebration they called Jack’s 
Carnival, where all the kids would dress up 
in costumes in a parade, and the usual kind 
of small community social events. And the 
high school sports were a very big event in 
the community. I mean everyone would back 



4 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


them and it was very important whether your 
team was winning or losing and we had an 
awful lot of fun that way 

Yes, it sounds like an interesting household with 
your mother’s mother living with you, Nan, and 
mom and dad and two sisters. What was it like 
in that household? 

I really had an ideal childhood. I just 
can’t think of having a better situation 
where parents raised the family, and my two 
sisters and I got along very well during this 
time. It was just very good. My mother was 
particularly good at emphasizing all of the 
important events in our lives. For example, 
if it was Valentine’s Day, if it was a birthday, 
these were all big events in our lives, and she 
would magnify our successes and minimize 
our failures. She was really an ideal mother. 
My father, too, was very interested in all of 
our affairs and the fact that he was a teacher 
made him very interested, of course, in all 
school events. So school events became a 
very important thing and with family very 
interested in extracurricular activities, 
whether it was a high school play, a sports 
event, a debate, or just a Valentine’s party at 
the school. 

Were you a good student ? 

I was. Yes. 

Where did you go to elementary school? 

A school called Robert Mitchell. Kind 
of an interesting story about that, in a way. 
When I was in kindergarten and the first 
grade, it was a very old school and there were 
problems with the furnace and it smoked up 
the school sometimes. This was during the 
time of the government WPA programs to 


build new schools. My father, at that time, 
was superintendent at Sparks, and I think he 
was the first one in the west to get the money 
to build a new school. For a year we went to 
another school, when I was in second grade, 
Mary Lee Nichols School. Then we came back 
when I was in the third grade and it was a very 
nice school. Robert Mitchell School is still 
there and had its fiftieth reunion not too long 
ago. It was a very worthwhile WPA project. 

One of the things that my dad tells about 
this story is that in order to encourage the 
local community to raise some of the bond 
money that was required, he mentioned that 
when they came over to the old school he 
instructed the janitors to take out the 100 watt 
light bulbs and replace them with twenty-watt 
light bulbs so it would be a little drearier. 
It was plenty dreary the way it was, but I 
thought that was kind of a good technique. 
The other thing that I remember about that 
school that was interesting is that, true to 
government bureaucracies of all sorts, there 
are many forms to fill out, and in those days 
the copies all had to be made with carbon 
paper. Everything had to come with thirteen 
copies; I remember my father telling me that 
when he invited the Director of WPA in 
San Francisco to come to the opening of the 
school, the invitation said, “Please send your 
acceptance in thirteen copies.” 

[laughter] I guess some people credit the 
beginning of modern bureaucracy with the 
New Deal. That’s a cute story. After the Robert 
Mitchell School, well tell me this, what did the 
Robert Mitchell School building; since it was 
this WPA project, what did it look like ? And 
you’re in a small town, right? 

Yes. 

So the classes are probably fairly small, right? 



Childhood, Youth and Family 


5 


Fairly small. There was one through sixth 
grades. It was in a very nice brick building 
with good playground equipment, basketball 
courts and so forth. It was, and still is, a very 
nice, well-built brick building. 

Single story, multi-story? 

Single story. 

After Robert Mitchell School, where did you go? 

At that time they had junior high school, 
which was from the seventh grade to ninth 
grade at Sparks Junior High School. Robert 
Mitchell was about two blocks from our home, 
and Sparks Junior High was also about two 
blocks from our home in the other direction. 
Everyone walked—my father walked to work, 
I walked to school, and both of my sisters 
walked to school. 

The small town living is very appealing to us 
these days, I think. 

[laughter] I would take my little wagon 
for my mother to the grocery store and pick 
up things and bring them back in my little 
wagon. 

And nowadays it seems we don t go anywhere 
unless we get in the car, right? 

That’s right. 

And after Sparks Junior High, what was the 
next school? 

Sparks High School. That was from 
sophomore to senior years. 

Do any teachers from your formative years 
stand out in your mind? 


Sure. I had some good teachers in 
elementary school, I remember very well. My 
second grade teacher I particularly remember 
because I thought she was the most beautiful 
woman. I was crazy about her. Grace Cantlon 
was her name. She still lives in Reno. I see 
her now and then. I actually remember my 
kindergarten teacher, Miss Dole. One time 
when I was giving a speech, she came up to the 
podium and asked if I remembered that she 
was my old kindergarten teacher, [laughter] 

Then I had, yes, in the fourth grade, Emily 
Tholl. She was a very athletic teacher, and 
she had our class participate in a tumbling 
team and put on a performance as a tumbling 
team. Inez Gilles was a fifth grade teacher, 
an excellent teacher. Doris Shaver was the 
sixth grade teacher, very fond of her. Seventh 
grade, was Miss Shapecase. Eighth grade, we 
had several teachers. One was Mrs. Hart, who 
taught English and Latin. I thought she was an 
excellent English teacher. Miss MacNamara 
was an excellent math teacher. Miss Dunn, 
in ninth grade, was a superb teacher. They 
named a school after Miss Dunn. She taught 
Civics. 

In high school, we had some excellent 
teachers too. Merle Singleton was one. He 
taught Art, Speech, and Dramatics and 
devoted a tremendous amount of time to 
extracurricular activities. In those days, it 
was part of the teachers’ job that they did 
these extracurricular activities. Merle would 
put on several plays during the course of the 
year. It was a lot of work for him. In those 
days, the teachers would all come to the 
school dances, too. It wasn’t a chore. They 
kind of liked it. Another teacher, a Speech 
teacher who was very good, was Kathleen 
Sweeney, and she coached our debate team 
the last years. And the History teacher, Velva 
Trulove, our English teacher, Evelyn Mantle. 
Recently, I participated in a thing they call 



6 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


“Voices” that is put on for the university 
library, and we were to pick particular poems 
that we liked. I kind of paid a little tribute 
to Evelyn Mantle because of how much she 
stimulated me in getting involved in English. 
I stated that the poems I recited were poems 
that I had remembered from Miss Mantles 
high school English class. Kipling’s “If” was 
one, “Ozymandias” was another, and Miltons 
sonnet on his blindness was a third. 

Those are excellent choices. 

I like those. 

What’s even more remarkable is that you 
remember all of these people. What a wonderful 
memory you have. 

Well, it was a big part of my life. 

It sounds like school was important to you. 

Very important; I loved it. I liked the 
classes and I liked the extracurricular 
activities. 

Besides the sports, what did you do? 

Well, I was active in all the school plays. 
They were a big thing for the community 
We had great turnouts for our school plays. 
We thought we were very important putting 
these on. And then they were pretty well 
done because Merle Singleton was so good at 
directing. Also, we had a very active debate 
team program, and we would participate in 
the state tournaments and contests in Speech 
and Debate. Actually, my partner, Jane Truex, 
and I were the state champions for the debate 
team my senior year. 

Do you remember what the topic was? 


Yes. It had to do with the Taft-Hartley Act; 
that was, I guess, my junior year. The next 
year was World Government. That’s right. 
Interesting enough, my partner and I were 
state debating champions for the state one 
year, and the next year, Barbara, my wife, and 
her partner, were state champions, [laughter] 
Sparks was doing real well in forensics. 

Yes, indeed, indeed. Now besides debate, were 
you also doing other kinds of speech? 

Yes. In high school, and I went on in 
college and did a lot of it, but in high school, 
yes, they had oratory contests. The Lions 
Club put on one, in particular, and I entered 
it, and I thought it was a wonderful speech. 
I lost. My debate partner, Jane Truex, won. 
[laughter] 

Was it a speech you wrote? 

Oh, yes, a speech I wrote. “Jim’s Gone 
Now” was the name of it. It was about a 
letter from a soldier received after he was 
killed in the war. I thought that it was just a 
tremendous speech, and so I gave it again at 
the state forensic meet, and I lost there again, 
too. My dad said they have the valedictorian 
and salutatorian give speeches at graduation 
and he said, “If you give that “Jim’s Gone” 
speech again, I’m going to crown you.” 
[laughter] 

Apparently, not everyone shared your opinion 
of the quality of this speech. 

No, no they sure didn’t, [laughter] 

That’s a great story. Besides debate, and speech 
and sports, that doesn’t leave a lot of time for 
other activities in school, does it? Were there 
other things that you were involved in? 



Childhood, Youth and Family 


7 


Yes, I wrote a column for the student 
newspaper. I was the sports editor so I wrote 
a column called “Hug’s Plugs.” 

And what sports did you cover? 

All the sports. 

And was this an opinion column, like they have 
critics of sports now, the Jim Murray types, or 
the Mike Downey’s or.... 

It was kind of a very friendly column 
about how well we were doing and what 
wonderful athletes we had at our school and 
why we should, if we lost the game, why we 
should have won. [laughter] 

I see. Well, you must have been a busy young 
man in high school with all these activities. 

I loved it. 

One of the things that comes to mind in looking 
back as an historian on this period, is that — 
and you sort of touched on this—this was the 
Great Depression. Do you recall what it was 
like, in that time? Do you recall there being 
periods of economic hardship? 

I do. I remember that when I was about 
four or five years old, we lived in a house that 
was by the railroad tracks. Sparks is a railroad 
town and that was the major employment, 
and we lived in that first house, quite close 
to the tracks; I remember very frequently 
people who would be traveling on the rails or 
unemployed people would come to the back 
door and ask for a sandwich. That was just 
ritual, if somebody wanted a sandwich, you 
gave them a sandwich. People were kind to 
each other in those days, that understanding 
of difficulties that others were having. We 


were fortunate because my father had a 
good job, but I do remember that we were 
not allowed to have two in the family with 
a job. For example, my mother couldn’t 
work in those days. I mean one income was 
considered enough in the community. But 
people were understanding to each other. 
Grocery stores would extend credit when 
people were in tough shape. Everyone kind of 
looked out for each other. They were tough 
times. 

Do you have other memories of that time? 

Only that, generally, people just didn’t 
have an awful lot. Small things were very 
important, like at Christmas or birthdays. 
They would be celebrated with as much fun 
and so forth, as now, but with small presents; 
smaller things became important and the 
same thing with toys and bicycles. It was a 
very big thing to have a bicycle. I remember 
I got one for Christmas and was very excited, 
but there was one boy whose father had died 
in the neighborhood that didn’t have one, and 
Harry Foote, one of the businessmen, got him 
one. It was a big thing. We all thought that was 
great. 

Yes. That’s interesting, that someone would 
reach out like that. I guess that’s more indicative 
of small town life. I suppose people feel more 
of a sense of community and that they’re all in 
the same boat, in a manner of speaking—much 
more so than we do nowadays. 

The biggest salaries there were the railroad 
workers. 

Now, were they union then? 

You know, I really don’t know. I have the 
feeling that they weren’t earlier. I know they 



8 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


became union. But in the early part of the 
Depression, I don’t think they were. Reno was 
always treated as the rich community Sparks 
was the working-class community 

Oh, is that right? 

Yes, Reno was, when we grew up, I mean 
we always thought that’s where rich people 
lived. 

What was the train company that came 
through there? Was that Union Pacific or the 
Southern Pacific? 

Southern Pacific, through Sparks. And 
it was the major roundhouse with the 
repair station and the refueling station, and 
that sort of thing. It was one of the major 
stopping points along the way. They had a big 
huge roundhouse where they had machinists 
and all sorts of people that could repair, 
principally the locomotives but the cars too. 

Any of that still there? 

No. It all got removed. When the diesel 
engines came into being that kind of undid 
the need for all these repairs to the steam 
locomotives. The way stations were a lot 
longer distances along the way, and Sparks, 
as a railroad community, really kind of came 
off the map after awhile. 

I imagine you must have had friends and 
playmates whose fathers worked for the 
railroad. 

Oh yes. A lot, many Italian and Mexican 
friends. We really didn’t have any or very 
few African blacks, as they would have 
been known then, at the time, but we had a 
rather large Mexican community and Italian 


community there. A lot of the Mexican 
community had been brought in as section 
hands and so forth. The Italian community 
was largely composed of farmers. 

Is Sparks also a farming community? 

Yes, it was. 

What sorts of things did they grow around 
there? 

Well, potatoes and hay and vegetables of 
all sorts. 

I see. So the vegetables were probably what, 
bound for market in Reno and some of the 
other towns around Nevada? 

Yes, that’s right. 

Any childhood friends that you recall? 

Well yes, I was just going to mention 
when we were talking about the Italian 
community, one of the other judges on our 
court, Judge Melvin Brunetti, and I were high 
school classmates. 

Oh, is that right? 

He was two years behind, and he was 
one of the Italian community that I was just 
mentioning, and his father had a grocery 
store in Reno and farm contacts, and later had 
a fish farm. I really got to know Mel Brunetti 
in high school. Earlier, I guess because he was 
younger, I didn’t know him as well. 

So you were friends in high school? 

Yes. And in college. In fact, when he came 
to college, I got him to join my fraternity. 



Childhood, Youth and Family 


9 


Oh really? 

Yes. And I got him to run for junior class 
president. So, yes, we have been friends for a 
long time. 

You go back a long ways. Any other friends 
from that time period that stand out in your 
mind? 

Well, one who was a very close childhood 
friend was Bruce Shelley. He was three years 
older than I, but we played a lot together—he 
and Gordon Foote and Eddie Reed and I. But 
Bruce, probably, is interesting because he is 
a television writer down in the Hollywood 
area and he has written a number of plays; 
he used to write, or screen things principally 
for TV, like “Get Smart.” I don’t know if you 
remember “Get Smart.” 

Oh sure, I remember “Get Smart.” 

He wrote a number of those. “M.A.S.H.” 
He wrote a number of “M.A.S.H. ’’programs— 
very clever writer. Always was the clever 
writer in high school with the newspaper. He’s 
always been a very clever, very bright person. 
But he and his sister, Alice, were very good 
friends. Ed Reed and Eleanor, his sister, and 
Gordon Foote and Margie Foote, we all played 
together with my sisters. 

Sounds like a pretty nice place to grow up, 
Sparks, Nevada. 

It was. It was. It was an excellent place. Yes. 
In high school, in my class, Jack Fountain was 
a close friend, Joe Bugica, Vincent Laviega, 
and Charlie Burke. Vincent is still in the 
Reno area. He is an executive with the power 
company. Jack Fountain was a very successful 
real estate developer. Unfortunately, he 


died a few years ago. Joe Bugica is with 
Westinghouse back in Pittsburgh. Charlie 
Burke is a college professor. We were friends, 
all of us, through college. 

I understand that you participated in Boys 
Nation. 

Yes, that’s right. 

Can you tell us a little bit about that? 

Sure. The American Legion sponsors 
Boys State throughout the nation, in which 
juniors in high school are brought together 
from around each state, and they elect officers 
and a legislature and governor, and then each 
state selects two representatives to go to Boys 
Nation as the senators from those states; I 
was selected as one of those to go to Boys 
Nation and it was a wonderful experience. 
We participated then as senators back there. 
I met the president of the United States, who 
was then [Harry] Truman. That’s also what 
President Clinton remembered as one of his 
highlights, was going to Boys Nation and 
meeting President [John] Kennedy. 

Oh yes. I remember that. Yes. 

Well, this was the same way with me. 
It certainly was a highlight in my life. We 
traveled back on the train, and I traveled with 
a boy from California who was a California 
representative. His name was Dwight Allen 
and a brilliant guy. We developed a fast 
friendship. Later, I met him when I went to 
law school. He was getting his doctorate in 
education and then our paths, oddly enough, 
have sort of been entwining since because he 
is on the International Board of the Baha’i 
religion with Judge [Dorothy] Nelson of 
our circuit. I haven’t seen him since, but I 



10 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


keep track of what he’s doing through Judge 
Nelson. 

Oh, that’s great. 

But the experience back there was really 
outstanding, and we certainly met key people 
there. I remember [Secretary of State] George 
Marshall was one that we spoke with at that 
time, and it was outstanding. I remember I 
had an exciting experience, at least for me— 
they had a dinner at which we could question 
the speakers there. As I recall it, I think the 
speaker was George Marshall, and we would 
ask questions, and then they awarded a book 
at the end to the person who asked the best 
question. And I was thrilled because I got the 
book. 

[laughter] That’s great. Do you remember what 
the book was? 

Yes, it’s called, The President Is Many Men. 
How long was your stay in Washington? 

It was a week. 

One week. And you, of course, went to the 
White House and met President Truman. What 
were your impressions of Harry Truman? 

Well, he was very congenial with all of 
us and gave a little talk. He made a point of 
having us each go by and shake hands with 
him, and he expressed the importance of this 
program, the Boys State and the Boys Nation, 
and I was very impressed with him. He was a 
very down-to-earth, solid-type person. 

Well, that’s certainly his reputation based in 
part upon a series of oral history interviews 


he did, with, I guess, Merle Miller, and it came 
out in a book called, Plain Speaking, as I recall. 
If you haven’t read that book I commend it to 
you because obviously he was influential in 
some way in your life, and it’s a very interesting 
portrait of an interesting man. 

While we were back there, we each met 
our own senators, which was a fascinating 
experience for all of us that were there; our 
senators at that time were Pat McCarran and 
George W. Malone, and they were congenial, 
spent a lot of time with us to show what they 
did, and how they did it. 

Now had you met either senator here in Nevada 
before going back there? 

I hadn’t. 

So you’re in Washington a week and what did 
you do besides go to the White House? You 
mentioned the dinner. You mentioned briefly 
a little bit about the Senate. What exactly went 
on at the Senate? 

We observed the Senate in session and, as 
I mentioned, we went to each of our senator’s 
offices, and they gave us quite a little bit of 
their time actually, explaining how things 
worked and what they did. Then we saw a lot 
of the areas of Washington, D.C. We went to 
the Supreme Court, then we went to the usual 
things like the Washington Monument, the 
memorials, Lincoln and Jefferson memorials, 
and the FBI Building, and the usual things 
that tourists do but, I’ll tell you, it was mighty 
impressive to me at that time. I was thinking 
I would like to be back here in politics, at that 
time, I thought. 

And how old were you when you had this 
experience? 



Childhood, Youth and Family 


11 


Seventeen. 

Formative. Formative. So coming back to 
Nevada with this experience as a seventeen 
year old, having met the president and seeing 
the Senate in action, did you see the Supreme 
Court in session? 

Not in session. They showed us the 
building. 




2 


University Life and 
Career Choices 


How did you decide to go to the University of 
Nevada, Reno? 

I always wanted to go to the University 
of Nevada. My parents had gone there, and 
they spoke about how much fun it was and all 
their fraternity and sorority life, and my dad 
was a celebrated athlete up there, so I’d never 
considered going anywhere else. 

That was it. It was foreordained. 

I wanted to go there. And I wanted to do 
what he’d done, [laughter] He’d been student 
body president, I wanted to be student body 
president, [laughter] 

Sounds like he was a pretty big figure in your life. 

He was. He was the kind of person that 
everybody liked and what a nice thing to grow 
up when, you know, everyone is crazy about 
your father. Very popular guy, great sense 
of humor, very considerate of other people 
but with a kind of impish twist. I mean he 


was always a lot of fun because he would be 
kidding everybody and giving them a hard 
time, but they loved it. 

So he was active in the community as well? 

In a lot of ways, yes. 

What sorts of activities did he participate in? 

Well, through the school, he would do a 
lot. During the social functions that took place, 
he would do a lot. He would be on committees 
and so forth. My mother, also, would do a lot 
of those things. Of course, that’s kind of part 
of a small community. A lot of people do a lot 
of different things. 

So they belonged to clubs and.... 

Yes. Lions Club—that kind of thing. 

And you sort of followed in your father’s and 
your mother’s footstep sounds like in being 
active in those kinds of things. 



14 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


Yes, I did. 

And so you went off to the University of Nevada 
at Reno. What year was that, do you recall? 

Yes. I graduated from high school in 1949, 
and later that year, I went to the University of 
Nevada. 

And I recall in high school, in that final year, 
you were showing me the yearbook earlier, you 
must have had some special honors bestowed 
upon you in high school. 

I was selected as the “Outstanding Boy” of 
the class. Interestingly, that next year, my wife, 
Barbara, was selected as the “Outstanding 
Girl” in her class. Also, one of the things that 
I liked the most was in track. I was really 
quite a good hurdler, and actually both senior 
and junior years I won almost all the meets I 
participated in, except for the state ones, and 
I can still run both of those races over in my 
mind. It’s like it was a movie, [laughter] In my 
junior year, this fellow from Las Vegas and I 
had almost identical times in high hurdles 
throughout the year. I mean wed watch each 
other’s newspaper clippings and it looked like 
it was going to be one heck of a race, and we 
were both so nervous that when the race was 
run, we both fell, [laughter] And the fellow 
that I’d beaten all year long won the state 
meet. I even got up and got third, if you could 
believe it. 

Oh my. 

And the second, in my senior year, again, 
I call it bragging, but I really was the best 
hurdler in the state, high hurdler. Low hurdler 
I was about even with another fellow from 
Elko, but high hurdles, I just, no way should 
I not have won. But unfortunately, I hurt my 


back during the year and it was an odd thing. 
It was the low hurdles that would throw it 
out until I would run the race, and you had 
to participate in morning trials for the state 
meet and for the Western Conference meet, 
but if I ran the low hurdles in the morning 
then my back would be thrown out. 

I’d rush down at noon, and there was a 
physical therapist who knew how to put it 
back and got it, and he’d jerk me around a little 
bit and then we’d get back in, and I’d go back 
up and run in the afternoon. But I couldn’t 
train very well, as well as I would have liked, 
and I was just sure I would break the state 
record that year. And the race that I say I run 
like it’s a movie in my mind is that I got a 
wonderful start the first time. I was clear over 
the first hurdle and going to the second and 
the second gun shot rang out calling us back, 
and, boy I would have broken the record with 
that race, because I got a tremendous start, 
but I guess it was probably rolling; [laughter] 
in any event, we got called back and then if 
you broke a second time you’d be disqualified 
so I waited. I got a slow start, but I was really 
picking up and just passing this fellow and I 
nicked my knee, and it was just enough to put 
me back about a foot from winning that race. 
And I thought, oh no, I did it again. The low 
hurdles were different; I led it all the way, but 
I think I ran out of gas a little bit on the last 
hurdle and Jack Carter from Elko, who I see 
all the time now and is a real estate appraiser, 
and I kid him about it that he passed me up 
cold on the last hurdle. Oh well, I got second 
both times, but I sure run both of those races 
over in my mind. 

Yes. I’ll bet, I’ll bet. Did you continue sports at 
the university? 

I did. I played freshman basketball. 
In football, they ran out of money and 



University Life and Career Choices 


15 


discontinued it for a couple of years. I did play 
one year when we were trying to get it started 
again but it was only limited. We played the 
alumni and a few things like that, but just to 
get it back started. I competed and I lettered 
four years in track up there. I was running 
hurdles, broad jump, and some relay. I was 
captain of the track team my last year. Yes. 
Track was my major sport there. 

You mentioned that you had pledged a 
fraternity at the university. What fraternity 
was that? 

ATO. 

Which stands for? 

Alpha Tau Omega. 

Fraternities were pretty important at the 
university? 

They were. Most anyone who really 
wanted to pledge a fraternity could pledge 
one or another. There were enough there that 
it was not an exclusive sort of thing, but it was 
a nice kind of a “club.” ATO, when I was going 
there, it was also my dad’s fraternity, was kind 
of the athletic fraternity. We usually would 
win the trophies for the athletic events. 

So did the fraternities have sporting events, sort 
of intermural between themselves? 

Yes. 

Any co-ed sports? 

You know there weren’t any at all. In fact, 
there really weren’t any women’s sports at all. 
That’s been a great improvement, that they 
have women’s sports now. There were women 


skiers and that’s about it. There really weren’t 
any others in college. 

Was there intercollegiate skiing or was this sort 
of a ski club? 

Intercollegiate. 

Oh really? So they would compete with other 
schools? 

Yes. 

From across the country? 

We had very good skiers, too. I think we 
won one NCA championship. 

Oh, I had no idea there was intercollegiate 
skiing. Of course, that’s a great place to do it. 
But I would imagine that, in the early 1950’s, 
skiing would be considerably different than 
what it’s like now. 

Well, the same kind of events. They would 
have the regular alpine events and cross¬ 
country and I’m sure the skiers have gotten 
better and the equipment’s a lot better, but 
they were essentially the same events, slalom 
and downhill. 

Besides being active in the fraternity and 
lettering four years in track, you must have 
had time for studies. 

Yes, I did. When I was a sophomore, they 
gave a watch to the boy and girl that had the 
highest academic records at that time. I got 
the one for the male student. 

That’s wonderful. You’re a high achiever. 

I don’t know. 



16 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


What college courses stand out in your mind? 

Well, let’s see. I liked the speech courses 
really well and participated in the debate 
there too, and the speech contests with 
other colleges on the West Coast. I liked the 
speech courses real well. The political science 
courses were very interesting. I had a number 
of courses there. Russell Elliott was a very 
good professor, and Wilbur Shepperson, in 
those areas. English courses were quite good. 
Dr. Eldridge and Dr. Morrison both taught 
excellent courses in English. I remember one 
was “The Bible As Literature’’that Dr. Eldridge 
taught that I thought was exceptionally good. 
And then I changed my major from political 
science to business administration because 
I thought, geez, if something happens and I 
don’t make it all the way to go to law school 
or anything, I’d better have something that 
I can do. I decided that I was going to take 
business administration and concentrate a 
little bit on accounting, which I did. And so, 
those courses were good. I liked the business 
administration courses and the accounting 
courses. 

When you graduated, what was your major, 
was it business administration? 

Yes. 

But it sounds like it must have been pretty early 
on that you had made up your mind that you 
wanted to go to law school and be a lawyer, is 
that right? 

Yes, about the fifth grade. 

Oh really? You’re so definite about that. There 
must have been an important experience that 
shaped that desire. 


Well, yes. Actually, I guess it was fourth 
grade. That teacher put on a little mock 
trial in our class, and they divided us up 
with attorneys and witnesses and jury and 
so forth. It was very well done, and I was an 
attorney for defending one of the fellows on 
a criminal charge, and I thought that was so 
much fun that, boy, I would like to do that. 
I would read biographies of famous lawyers, 
along the way and I decided, early on, that’s 
what I want to do, be like Clarence Darrow 
and that group. 

You must have read a biography of Darrow. 

Yes, I did. 

Do you recall which one? 

No, I don’t actually. I don’t recall who the 
author was. 

Were there other lawyers’ lives that you read 
about that you recall that were influential? 

Some of the early Americans, Daniel 
Webster, I guess I was quite interested in the 
early history at that time; Thomas Jefferson, 
I was trying to think, what other, well, there 
were a couple of other lawyers later on, I’m 
trying to think, there were about three or 
four other biographies that I’ve read along 
the way but I can’t remember which lawyers 
were involved. Bill Fallon, I think was one 
and it’s a shame I can’t remember who 
the other ones were but there were, I read 
probably five or six biographies. I was big 
on lawyer biographies. 

And what was it about lawyering that 
appealed to you as a child? Obviously, as an 
adult, you see it differently. 



University Life and Career Choices 


17 


The court room. The excitement of 
trying the case and feeling like you were 
doing something to defend the persons that 
were innocent and to right the wrongs if 
somebody had been injured, that kind of 
thing. 

So you saw yourself as a defense lawyer? 

Yes. 

... and not a prosecutor? 

Really not as a prosecutor. 

What did your mother think of this boyhood 
desire? 

I think she thought it was a good idea. We 
didn’t know any lawyers really, at that time. 
Well, there was one lawyer in Sparks, but it 
seemed like that would be a good idea. Yes. 
She was encouraging and so was my father. 

So your father, didn’t necessarily, I mean he’s 
such a role model for you it seems, that he 
wasn’t encouraging you to become a teacher 
or a school administrator? 

No, no he wasn’t actually. He sort of left 
it to me what I wanted to do, and I think he 
thought it was a good idea. 

So, you pursued a course, first in political 
science and then in business administration. 
What made you think..., sounds like when you 
got to the university you might have had some 
doubts a little bit about this lawyering business. 

No, I always wanted to be a lawyer. They 
told me that a very good major for law school 
was political science so that’s why I enrolled 


in it. That was a good major for it. It’s just 
that I got worried that, what happens if, you 
know, I go in the service and something 
happens I can’t go on to law school, I better 
have something, an occupation that I can see 
what I’m going to be doing. And that’s why I 
went into business and accounting. 

Of course, about the time you were graduating 
from high school and going into college, that 
was the time of the Korean conflict, wasn’t it? 

That’s right. Yes, yes. 

And what did you feel about that at that time? 

Well, I thought that I definitely should 
do my duty and serve in the service; I was 
deferred while I was in college, but I was in 
the Naval Reserve and while I was there I was 
training and going in the summer to what 
they called the “ROC” program, Reserve 
Officer Candidate, so that when I graduated 
I would be a commissioned naval officer, and 
I planned to go into the Navy, which I did. 

Let’s stick with the university a little bit. I want 
to learn more about your Navy experience, but 
at the university, you’ve mentioned a number 
of the teachers who were important to you and 
the courses. What about social activities? Most 
of it must have centered around the fraternity. 

Yes, and I was very active in student 
government. 

In what ways? 

Well, I ran right away for freshman class 
president, and I was elected freshman class 
president. I loved the politics aspect of it. And 
I ran for student senator; I was elected senator 



18 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


for two years and then in my senior year I was 
elected student body president. And that took 
up a lot of time. That was a lot of social activity 
there and, Barbara, my wife, was my secretary, 
the student body secretary. 

Is that how you met? 

No, we met in high school. 

Oh, all right. Tell me about that. 

Well, we met when we were in a high 
school play together. 

Do you remember which play ? 

I can’t remember what the name of the 
play was. I’m sure it’s in the yearbook. 

It wasn’t something like Romeo and Juliet? 

No, no it was, as I recall, a comedy. That 
was a very good social event because we’d 
usually go afterward, in those days, to the 
drive-in, which was the big thing, to get 
hamburgers and a milkshake, and that was 
kind of the date aspect of things. And my good 
friend, Joe Bugica, took Barbara, her name was 
Barbara Van Meter then, and I took Lorraine 
Lague, and during the course of the evening it 
just seemed that Barbara and I got along better, 
and he and Lorraine got along better so on the 
way home we just switched [laughter] from the 
front seat to the back. I think I was driving, 
and I think Barbara came up and sat with me 
and from then on we started dating. The only 
problem with it was I became crazy about her, 
but I had a competitor, Doug Byington, that 
she liked pretty well too, and we were both 
from the same football team and, I think as I 
just mentioned before we started, that I was on 


the football team and really happy I was first 
string. I thought I was going great guns and the 
first game I broke my leg and I couldn’t play 
any more that season, so I was relegated to the 
stands with a cast watching Doug Byington, a 
very good halfback, running for touchdowns 
[laughter], so it was not a happy time. And 
later our team won the state championship 
too. That was sort of a disadvantage as far 
as dating competition. Oddly enough, Doug 
Byington and his wife are quite close friends 
of Barbara and I now. Doug married a girl, 
Nancy Houton, who I had dated quite a bit in 
college. We see each other quite a bit too at 
social events. 

Well, that’s nice. 

Small town. 

You’d already been involved somewhat in 
politics, as I understand it, at Sparks High 
School. 

Yes. Just local, student politics. 

When you got to the University of Nevada, 
Reno, I understand you were politically inclined 
then, too. 

I was. It’s interesting. My father had been 
the student body president when he went up 
there, and I thought, gee, that would be a nice 
thing, I’d like to do that if I could. So, I did 
get involved in student politics right away 
I was the freshman class president, then I 
was a senator on the student senate for two 
years, and then I was elected the student body 
president. It seemed to work out. 

What did you find most challenging about that 
kind of political involvement? 



University Life and Career Choices 


19 


Well, it was certainly very stimulating 
because the university officials paid quite 
a little bit of attention to the student 
government, student officers, and we had a 
lot of responsibility for public expenditures 
of money relating to athletics; we had an 
athletic control board, we had the student 
finance committee, which was responsible for 
dealing with student fees, and we also were 
responsible for a student bookstore, and the 
thing that was good about it was we did have 
a lot of responsibility One of the things that 
I was the most interested in at that time was, 
we did not have a student union building, so 
we organized a student effort to go around 
the state to lobby the legislature for a student 
union building; various representatives went 
to contact their assemblymen and senators 
in various areas and it was really quite 
successful; it was helped along a lot by a 
donation made by the Jot Travis Estate and, 
in order to utilize that, the legislature was 
encouraged to put up matching funds, which 
they did, and the student union building was 
built. 

Now did this happen when you were student 
body president, your senior year? 

Yes. Then it was approved and the 
building was built after that. 

I see. When you first ran for freshman class 
president, were your fraternity brothers atATO 
helpful in organizing a campaign? 

They were. They were very helpful and 
very supportive. They took me around 
places and showed me the ropes and where 
to campaign and so forth. I remember the 
fellow I was running against was a fellow by 
the name of Bud Weiser. 


[laughter] That’s a funny name. 

And he had very good campaign signs 
because he used all the Budweiser [beer] 
signs all over. It was kind of hard to compete 
with outdoor signs when he had all these 
neat Budweiser signs. I remember at college 
assembly where they were all introducing us 
before the election, we each got up to give a 
little talk, and I said that I really appreciated 
being able to run against such a fine slate 
of candidates and, indeed, I thought that 
Budweiser was really a very fine beer. I got 
a big laugh, and I think maybe that got me 
elected, I don’t know. 

[laughter] Well, it must be tough to run a 
campaign against someone who has instant 
name recognition, [laughter] 

That’s right. 

When you were student body president, again 
that’s obviously a much larger responsibility and 
it sounds like you took it very seriously—took it 
beyond the bounds of the campus, out into the 
state as a whole to lobby for this student union. 
Do you remember the campaign, though, when 
you ran for student body president? 

Yes. Yes, I do. I think I had posters, and 
I had a several point platform. It seemed 
like there were maybe four; I’m not sure. 
I know one of them was to get the student 
union building. Another one was to get our 
athletic teams into a conference. We were an 
independent school, and I thought a lot of 
the students would be a lot more excited if we 
participated in a conference. And a third thing 
I think was to send ambassadors throughout 
the state to the various high schools to 
encourage our best students to come to the 



20 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


University of Nevada. We did that, too, after 
I was elected. We sent people with kind of an 
entertainment program that they could put on 
at their assemblies. There was Janice Rozasco, 
a wonderful piano player who could imitate 
Jimmy Durante really well even though she 
was a woman she did a good job with it. And 
Jim Hulse, who recited “Casey at the Bat.” 
That always went over really big. Jim Hulse is 
now a university professor at the University 
of Nevada, a historian. 

He and I have spoken many times on the phone 
and exchanged letters. He also serves, as you 
probably know, on our editorial board for 
Western Legal History. 

No, I didn’t realize that. 

He’s been a big help to me. 

Yes. Well, he’s a fine person, a very 
able person. At that time, he was a very 
shy person. He sort of blossomed when he 
became involved in Dramatics and Speech 
and all of a sudden he was just a huge hit in 
his recitations. 

That’s nice, to know that some of that experience 
paid off for him. Getting back to your own 
experience in politics, it sounds to me like 
you’re beginning to, at this point, to build some 
constituencies around the state perhaps. Did it 
ever occur to you that you wanted to perhaps 
run for a political office in state government? 

Yes, I did think that I would want to. Yes, 
I did, at some time. But it was going to be 
quite a ways off. 

And, at this time, if I’m not mistaken, you had 
changed your major from political science to 
business administration. 


That’s right. 

So you’re hedging your bets a little bit. 

I was afraid that if law school didn’t work 
out that I wanted to something that I could 
go out and get a job doing right away. 

But you did graduate. What year was your 
graduation? 

1953. 

1953, you graduated with a Bachelor of Science 
in Business Administration? 

That’s right. 

I imagine someone of your caliber undoubtedly 
graduated with honors? 

I did. After I became student body 
president, I slid down a little bit. I think 
I graduated about fourth or fifth in my 
graduating class. But I was on senior honor 
roll and all that sort of thing. I was elected to 
Phi Kappa Phi, which is similar to Phi Beta 
Kappa. 



3 

U.S. Navy, Marriage, and 
Stanford Law School 


In 1953, when you graduated, were you ready 
to go to law school? 

Well, that was the time of the Korean War, 
and I was in the Naval Reserve while I was 
going to college, and my plans always were 
to, after I graduated from college, go into the 
navy to serve my time. I was in a program—an 
officer’s training program—Reserve Officer 
Candidate, they called it. You’d go down 
during the summers for what was essentially 
the officer’s training for two summers and 
then on graduation you’d be commissioned as 
an ensign in the navy. That’s what I planned 
to do and that’s what happened. Although I 
wasn’t called up until September, so I had some 
interim few months between graduation and 
that’s when I worked for an accounting firm. 

Oh, you put your education to work. You’d 
studied accounting at the university. When you 
were called up in September of1953, where were 
you, well, I guess you were already inducted. I 
don’t know quite how that works. How does 
that work? 


You aren’t inducted until you are actually 
called up, and they are ready to take you 
somewhere. They were then sending me back 
to a supply school in Bayonne, New Jersey, 
and that’s where I went in September. 

So I suppose you had what would be equivalent 
to basic training at Bayonne? 

Yes. Actually, the basic training sort of was 
what you got during the summers and then at 
Bayonne, New Jersey, it was specific training 
in naval supply matters. 

What was that experience like? Being in the 
navy in Bayonne, New Jersey? 

Well, Bayonne, New Jersey, was interesting. 
We enjoyed it quite a lot too because on 
weekends we were able to go into New York 
and see the plays and musicals and that was 
an exciting experience to us. I had three guys 
that I roomed with, and we frequently would 
go in. One thing I’d say about New York, New 
York is always thought of as a cold city to other 



22 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


people. They certainly treated the military 
people very well. Lots of times when we would 
go into the city and not have tickets to a play 
where someone was unable to use the tickets, 
they would give us their tickets. 

That’s nice to hear How long were you stationed 
in Bayonne? 

Six months. 

And then where did you go? 

It was interesting because during the time 
I graduated from there and was sent to my 
next assignment, we were given about three 
weeks off for leave. And during those three 
weeks, I married Barbara. 

Oh, I was going to ask you about that. What 
was it like to be in Bayonne with Barbara out 
here in Reno? 

Well, I was lonesome for her. But we wrote 
every day, and we planned a wedding, that is, 
she planned the wedding; I showed up about 
a day before to get married the next day, and 
we then went on our honeymoon. Not having 
gone to very many places, we chose to go to 
Los Angeles [laughter] because neither of us 
had traveled much. But there was Hollywood. 
We were anxious to see that sort of thing. It 
was interesting, on the assignment of duty, 
I had envisioned that I would be joining 
the navy to see the world. When I put in 
the preference for duty, you fill out a little 
card. I’ve since learned better how to do that 
but I put, first, European theater, second, 
Asian theater. Barbara was kind of excited 
that maybe we would get assigned to one of 
those areas; it would be exciting. The captain 
of the school had come from Hawthorne, 
Nevada, and we each had a program where 


we’d sit with the captain, and he found out 
I was from Nevada. I didn’t want anyone to 
think I’d be real happy to be assigned back to 
Nevada so the third preference for duty I put 
“Not in Nevada,” which was a dumb thing 
to do because I’m just sure that when some 
person in the bureau of personnel got a hold 
of that and said, “We’ll fix this guy” I was 
stationed in Hawthorne, Nevada, at the naval 
ammunition depot—I became a desert sailor. 
I called Barbara, she was all excited to hear 
where we might be going and I said, “Well, 
it’s not all that bad. I’m really not assigned to 
long extensive sea duty.” She said, “Well, that’s 
good. But you sound like you got Hawthorne.” 
I said, “Yes.” [laughter] 

My recollection of Hawthorne was, I 
played football there in high school and the 
wind came up so strong in the game that you 
could barely see from one side of the field 
to the other, dust blowing. I remember one 
fellow on our team, Orin Parks, kicked a 
punt that went, believe it or not, two hundred 
yards, [laughter] It went the length of the 
football field, over the fence and rolled out 
in the street because it caught the wind. My 
recollection of Hawthorne was that, and I 
remember thinking oh, I’m not real happy 
about that. But it worked out fine. We enjoyed 
it very much. I was the assistant comptroller 
on the base and dispersing officer, and I was 
there for the remainder of my two years and 
I really liked Hawthorne a lot. 

Was your wife able to come down and join 
you there? 

She was. 

Well, it must have been a pretty pleasant duty, 
all things considered. 

It was. It worked out very nice. 



17 S. Navy, Marriage, and Stanford Law School 


23 


It doesn’t sound like Hawthorne was hazardous 
duty. 

It was not hazardous duty. Actually, the 
Korean War ended just a little bit before I 
graduated from the supply school. I think 
a lot of us were scheduled to go on aircraft 
carriers at that time and then when the war 
ended that changed all that. I think that’s why 
a lot of us were assigned to shore. 

I see. So you were, when you were mustered 
out in Hawthorne, you mean, you served your 
whole tour there? 

Yes. 

When you left the Navy, what did you do then? 

Went right to law school. 

And how did you come to choose Stanford? 

Well, actually, I thought about going to 
a school in the East just to get more of an 
eastern experience, but we had a baby that 
was born just about five weeks before my tour 
of duty ended at Hawthorne and thinking 
about it, it seemed more realistic to go to a 
west coast school; I was very happy to go to 
Stanford. 

Had you applied to other schools? 

I had applied to other schools, and I had 
applied to Stanford; the other thing that 
encouraged me was I got a scholarship there 
so that helped me. 

Oh that always helps direct one’s attention, 
doesn’t it? It makes choices easier. What stands 
out about your experience at Stanford? 


Well, one thing that stands out is the 
first day of class there was a professor there 
by the name of George Osborne, who had 
a very deep commanding voice. I recall the 
first day he began asking these questions 
using the Socratic method and making us 
realize that we had to be very careful in our 
thoughts and expressions because he was a 
brilliant man. It was a little bit like the movie 
Paper Chase where he just could scare the 
very dickens out of all of us. He eventually 
during the year went around the class and 
got everyone. It took him a little longer with 
some of us than others to realize we were 
complete fools. But eventually he got us all. 
Even though he scared us so much, it was a 
very valuable thing in my mind. It made us 
realize that we had to do some very critical 
thinking, and we couldn’t just sort of coast 
along like sometimes we do in some of our 
social science classes where you just talk on 
and on. You had to reason very carefully, and 
you had to be able to support what you were 
saying. And it was a very good thing, but he 
really made us all realize what we had to do 
to think like lawyers. In the end, he was a very 
kindly man. That was his last year at Stanford 
and then he went to Hastings. We’re all very 
fond of him. We gave him a big party at the 
end, but I’ll have to tell you he sure scared us 
to death. 

Maybe that was a good thing. 

It was a good thing. Law schooling was a 
good thing. 

And what was his subject. What did he teach? 

Personal property in our first year class. 
His expertise was in mortgages. He wrote a 
book on mortgages but he could teach a lot 
of things, Equity, I’m sure he wouldn’t have 



24 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


had any trouble teaching most any subject. 
He had command of it all. 

Do other professors at Stanford Law stand out 
in your mind in addition to George Osborne? 

Yes. I thought we had some very 
outstanding professors. Professor Shepherd 
taught Contracts, Wes Malone taught Torts, 
Keith Mann taught Labor Law, Professor 
Thurmon, who normally taught Torts and 
Tax, but we had him for Tax because he 
was taking a sabbatical. He later went on to 
become Dean at the University of Utah. Let’s 
see, one that was kind of interesting was Bill 
Baxter, who is still teaching there; Bill Baxter 
was a student just two years ahead of my class. 
A brilliant person; he came back to teach; 
he taught some of us who had been there 
when he was in law school. He served one 
year as a law clerk and came back and taught 
Administrative Law. 

As a law student, most of your time has to 
be taken up in studying. I know it’s just an 
overwhelming experience to go to law school. 
I know that from talking to friends and my 
brother and people who became lawyers. But 
did you have any time for extracurricular 
activities. Were you involved in politics? 

I wasn’t involved in politics, but other 
than that we did a lot of talking in the student 
lounge about politics, that’s for sure, but as far 
as being actively participating, I did not. I was 
one of the married students there. We lived in 
the married student housing area, which at that 
time was an old army barracks in Menlo Park. 
We got to know each other very well, because 
the walls were paper-thin. A lot of us had little 
children, just babies, one or two years old; I 
remember our apartment had a little courtyard 


and in the middle of all the apartment houses 
all the little kids would go out there and there 
was quite a little biting each other [laughter], 
but we got to know everybody pretty well 
there. I do remember there was a whale of 
a change going from the base at Hawthorne 
where we had officer’s quarters, a nice brick 
house and a basement and everything, to 
the married student housing at Stanford. I 
remember when I brought Barbara down in 
the car, the baby was crying most of the way 
and it was kind of a tough trip; I remember 
when we went into the apartment, the couch 
was a single bed with a mattress rolled up on 
it. The kitchen cabinet was a metal steel locker 
and it was turned over on its side and there was 
a kitchen chair that was right in the middle of 
the room. I remember Barbara went in and 
this baby was crying, and she sat down in the 
chair and started crying, [laughter] That was 
our introduction to the student housing. It 
worked out and it was fine, and we had a lot 
of fun there and we did have a lot of social 
interaction with all those married students 
that were there, and they have remained good 
friends ever since. 

That must have been a bit devastating. A 
young father brings his wife and baby to a 
place like that and then it’s just, it must have 
been overwhelming. Of this circle of friends at 
Stanford Law, any particular people stand out 
in your mind? 

Well, the ones that we were the closest to 
were the married students. Our next-door 
neighbor was John Hopkins and Alice. John 
is a practicing attorney in San Jose, a tax 
attorney Jerry Mise, and I think he practices 
in Washington. They were a class ahead. And 
then there was, in our class, Robin Faisant, 
Art Leinwald, Guy Blais, Skip Crist, and 



17 S. Navy, Marriage, and Stanford Law School 


25 


Bill Owen, were married students that, as 
couples, we palled around together. It was 
very pleasant. It was fun. 

You have a remarkable facility with names, 
I think. You remember people from your 
past with a great deal of ease. I think that’s 
remarkable. This experience in law school, were 
there particular subjects in which you excelled? 

It’s funny the way that works out 
sometimes. The ones that you may think 
you’re the best in you don’t necessarily get the 
best grade in. I liked a number of subjects. I 
liked Contracts and Torts and Constitutional 
Law, and I liked Trusts very much too. I 
thought I was a real star in Trusts during the 
summer. We had a visiting professor and it 
turned out that I got a C+. That’s the only 
C I ever got in college or law school. It also 
kept me from getting on Order of the Coif. It 
was a subject I thought I was really good in. 
[laughter] 

It’s funny how that works. So, at law school, 
you had a lot of interests. Were you involved 
in, I think you were involved in the law review, 
weren’t you? 

I was. At that time what they did is they 
would offer an opportunity to be on the law 
review if you were in the top, it was either 
the ten or fifteen percent of the class, I think 
it was maybe the top fifteen percent of the 
class. I was thrilled to be selected for the law 
review. I wrote a comment and participated 
in it up to a point, then I had an opportunity 
where I could possibly take the Nevada bar 
early Being married I was very anxious to 
get started as soon as I could when I got out 
because we didn’t have much money I was 
going to get out in January of 1958 but they 


don’t give the bar twice a year. They only do 
it once in Nevada, and they don’t give that 
until September, or didn’t at that time. I had 
the idea that maybe I could petition to take 
the bar before I graduated from law school. 
Russ McDonald, who was then actually head 
of the legislative council bureau, had done it 
for one other law student and so I contacted 
him, and he said, “Yes,” he would file a petition 
to the Supreme Court. The court granted the 
petition. So then I figured I better study hard. 
I then dropped off the law review so I could 
study for the bar for the quarters just before 
I took the Nevada bar. That worked out very 
well because I passed, and then when I did 
graduate in January 1958 I could start right 
away practicing. 

Well that took a lot of foresight it seems to me 
in wanting to do that. You must have gone, did 
you take any breaks, any summer breaks while 
you were in law school? 

No, no. 

You went straight through? 

That’s right. Which was a very good 
program at that time for a married student. 
And at that time they didn’t have all these 
clerkships that everyone can go to during 
the summer. You would have to find a job 
somewhere and so it was just a lot better to 
go right straight through for me. 

When you studied to take the bar in Nevada, 
were there any organized bar review courses? 

No, I just studied from my notes in law 
school and outlining. 

And where did you take the bar exam? 



26 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


In Reno. 

In Reno? At the courthouse? 

No, it wasn’t at the courthouse. It was 
in some place that was like an auditorium. I 
think maybe it was the Elk’s Hall. 

Was there anyone else there? 

Yes. All of the persons taking the Nevada 
bar were all there. Because that was the 
normal September bar exam for the whole 
state. 

Oh I see. So when you passed the bar, what did 
you do then? 

Well then I was a unique animal in law 
school. People were wishing they had that 
behind them too. It’s funny because I came 
back and I think about October I found out 
I’d passed the bar so I had a couple months 
there where I had passed the bar, and they 
were worried about taking the bar yet, so I was 
a celebrity [laughter] among the law students. 
Oh, they thought that was pretty good. 

A celebrity once again, I should add. You’ve 
had a lot of honors and celebrity throughout 
your schooling years. You graduated in January 
of 1958? 


Yes. 



4 


Early Law Practice in Reno 


And you have the bar exam behind you—a 
unique experience for a new graduate from law 
school. What happens next? 

Well then, I had already made 
arrangements to join a firm with two of my 
college classmates who had graduated earlier. 
They were a little older than I was, about three 
years older. But I had known them both 
in college. Particularly I knew one, Charlie 
Springer, quite well because we trained 
together in track. He was a sprinter, and I 
was a hurdler, and we used to run together 
and train together and we would talk about 
what our ambitions were and so we got to be 
quite good friends; and so, I talked to him 
about it and they had, Springer and Howard 
McKissick, had just formed a partnership the 
year before; I had an arrangement to go in 
with them, the first year as an associate and 
then after the first year Id be a partner the next 
year. And that was a fascinating experience. 
We were partners for five years. 

And where was the practice? 


It was in Reno. Very close to the building 
we’re sitting in. 

And just the three of you in the office? Other 
employees in the firm? 

We had three of us, and one secretary. 
And what sorts of business did you have? 

We were just starting and so we took any 
kind of business that came in the door. And 
that made it very exciting because we had to 
learn a lot of different things, but it was a very 
general practice. I remember very shortly after 
I was there, Howard McKissick came in, his 
door opened right into my little office, and he 
had a person who was charged with landing 
his airplane on the street in Gerlach, Nevada, 
a very small town in northern Nevada; he 
was charged with, I guess it would be a traffic 
offense, and I remember Howard came into 
my office and introduced me to the client and 
said, “Here’s Mr. Hug, he’s an expert in these 
matters.” [laughter] I hadn’t realized that I was 



28 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


an expert on landing planes on the streets, but 
it was interesting... and a lot of our practice 
had to go that way. We had to learn as we 
went. It was sure fun. 

Well, what was your reaction to that, to being 
declared an expert in airplane traffic violations? 

I had to clear my throat and pretend that 
I was. [laughter] Then I quickly went and 
found out all about it right afterwards. 

There was an airplane at McCarran Field 
yesterday, I think they could have—over here 
at the airport—they could have used expertise 
like yours. 

In the accident where the plane collided 
with the bus, I should have been there. 

[laughter] We’re going to have to edit that out. 
[laughter] Well, do you remember other early 
cases? 

Yes. That was one of the nice things 
about our small firm practice was that we 
got into court a lot. One of the things where 
I was really learning to try cases was in the 
criminal appointment process in the federal 
court, and at the state court where they would 
appoint young attorneys to represent indigent 
defendants. At the federal court youd do it 
for free, it was part of your responsibility as 
a lawyer and anyone who became a lawyer 
automatically got on the roll and they’d be 
called. The judge would call you over and you 
would represent people. I had several trials 
there that were really learning experiences 
for me and it worked out pretty well because, 
it worked out for the defendants because you 
worked really hard for your clients to give 
them appropriate representations. There was 


one that I think contributed to my becoming 
a federal judge. 

Oh, now that would be interesting. Tell us 
about that. 

[laughter] This is about Bill the Booster. 
Clarence Junior Richards was charged with 
two counts of passing counterfeit bills at one 
of the local casinos, twenty-dollar bills, and he 
had kind of a bad rap sheet, pretty complete 
rap sheet. When I went over to represent him, 
I had been furnished this so I could see that 
he wasn’t a person who had a stellar record. 
And I asked him a question that now nobody 
ever asks, no defense attorney asks. But when 
I went in I said, “Mr. Richards, you’re charged 
with passing counterfeit bills. Did you do it”? 

And he said, “No, no, no Mr. Hug, I didn’t 
do it.” 

And I said, “Oh.” 

And he said, “No, I wouldn’t want to get 
mixed up with one of these federal raps at all.” 

I said, “Well, you’ve got kind of a bad 
record here on this sheet I have.” 

He said, “Oh, I know it’s a terrible record 
but I’ve really reformed. I have a new 
occupation. I’m very happy with it. I certainly 
wouldn’t want to get tied up with any federal 
offence.” 

And I said, “Well, that’s good. What is it?” 

He said, “I’m a booster.” 

And I said, “A booster?” 

He said, “You don’t know what a booster 
is, do you?” 

And I could see I went down in his 
estimation quite a bit. I said, “No, no I’m sorry 
Mr. Richards, I don’t know.” 

He said, “A booster, a booster, a shoplifter.” 

I said, “Oh, oh, that’s, that’s really good, 
uh, nice work.” And he said, “Well, that’s the 
secret of it.” 



Early Law Practice in Reno 


29 


He said, “I don’t ever really take enough 
to be guilty of a felony, and I just go around 
to various stores. I use the ‘derrick’ system 
where I put a coat over my shoulder and bring 
things up under my arm.” He demonstrated 
it to me and I said, “Well, that seems to work 
well.” 

He said, “Yes, but my girlfriend is really 
good at it.” 

I said, “Oh.” 

“Yes, well she went to booster school, he 
said.” 

Booster school? 

Yes. He said, “In Los Angeles. They have a 
six-week course and at the end of that, when 
you’ve completed it they’ll either put you on 
their payroll or else they’ll arrange to fence 
the goods. She uses the ‘big purse’ system.” 

I said, “Well, that’s wonderful. Well, you 
know this is really interesting, but I don’t 
think it’s going to make much of an argument 
for the jury.” 

He said, “Well, yes, I suppose not.” 

But I said, “You can plead guilty to one 
charge, and they will drop the other. You 
know, I’m sure willing to try this case.” And 
he said, “Well, I really didn’t know they were 
counterfeit bills.” 

He said, “A fellow gave them to me in the 
bar and said, ‘you go gamble them and we’ll 
split the winnings’” 

He said, “I didn’t know they were 
counterfeit.” 

I said, “Well, I’m willing to try it. 

So he said, “Well, I don’t know, maybe we 
should plead guilty.” 

So we determined that we would reveal 
this to the court that we had an offer, a plea 
that he could plead guilty to one of the two 
counts. Judge Bruce Thompson was the judge. 
Bruce Thompson said when he heard this, he 


said, “Well, I understand you want to plead 
guilty but not for the reasons that you are 
guilty, is that right?” 

Richards said, “That’s right.” 

He said, “Well, I’m not going to accept that 
plea.” 

And of course, that’s the law now. And 
so, we tried the case and during that time I 
really got to like this fellow. He had a good 
sense of humor, and he had a lot of ability 
and I would talk to him and say, “You know, 
if we can get out of this, you really ought to go 
back to Montana and join your family, there 
are a lot of things you can do, you’d be a good 
salesman.” 

“You’re right, Mr. Hug. If I ever get out of 
this thing, you’re right. I’m going to go back to 
Montana, straighten out my life.” I said, “Well, 
I sure hope it works out for you.” Well, lo and 
behold, the jury acquitted him, and we drove 
back that night. At that time the federal court 
was in Carson City, and we drove to Reno, 
and I let him off at the hotel. And he said, 
“I sure appreciate what you did for me, Mr. 
Hug, I’d like to know your size.” I said, “My 
size?” He said, “Yes, I’d like to boost your suit.” 
[laughter] So you can see I really reformed 
this man. [laughter] Now the reason why I 
say that contributed to my being appointed as 
a federal judge is this: President Carter was 
selecting appellate judges for the courts of 
appeals, he had a commission. It was different 
than any other president did before or since. 
He had a commission of eleven persons, and 
you’d have to file an application form that had 
all sorts of questions. One of the questions it 
asked was, “Your ten most significant cases 
that you tried.” And so I thought, well, just 
for the heck of it, it would be fun to put down 
that case. Either the commission’s got a sense 
of humor or they don’t, [laughter] I put down 



30 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


a little kind of a short version of what I told you 
and, so, when I went down there the applicants 
separately were being interviewed. They would 
go around the table and each person would 
ask a question that you would answer. When it 
got to the chairman, he said, “I only have one 
question, Mr. Hug. Is that the suit?” [laughter] 

That’s an absolutely marvelous story That is just 
great. That really is. That’s a great story about 
a very significant case in your career. After your 
first year of working with Charlie Springer and 
Howard McKissick, did they take you on as a 
full partner? 

Yes. 

Do you recall what your salary was? 

When I started it was four hundred dollars 
a month and then when I became a partner, it 
was one-third of whatever our net was, which 
would boost it quite a bit. As I recall, we were 
probably making somewhere, maybe eighteen 
thousand dollars a year. 

And how did that compare with what your 
friends and colleagues might have been making 
in other professions? Do you have any sense of 
that? 

At that moment, I think when I became a 
partner, I think, I was doing better than some 
of the others that were just beginning. Because 
I think then a starting salary was maybe a little 
more than that four hundred dollars generally, 
maybe it was five or six hundred, but then it 
didn’t increase that much as mine did after the 
first year. 

What was the legal community like here in 
Reno at that time? This is, we’re talking 1959, 
1960, early 1960s. 


It was a small, friendly legal community 
where people, where attorneys trusted their 
word and each other, and would fight hard in 
court and when an attorney represented that 
he was going to do something, he’d do it. If he 
represented he’d shown you all the pictures, 
you could count on it, with the exception of 
a very few and everyone sort of seemed to 
know who they were. Then it was always very 
difficult for them because then they always 
had to tow the hard line because no one would 
believe them, but there were just very few, four 
or five. At that time, the other thing about the 
legal community was the divorce business was 
very big because the rest of the country had 
very strict divorce rules. California did; New 
York did. The only ground in New York was 
adultery, California had a long waiting period 
for divorces to be final, and so we had quite 
a divorce practice; as did any attorney, which 
was fascinating, in that, people would come 
establish residence here and, most frequently, 
we were trying to get the other side to appear 
through an attorney and resolve matters. That 
generally was what was done. But you meet 
some very interesting people. A lot of people, 
current residents here came as a result of that, 
doctors, lawyers, professors. Then eventually 
the rest of the world caught up with Nevada 
and realized that divorce was no longer such 
a big thing. 

Did you handle any of these divorce cases? 

Yes. 

Any particular ones that stand out in your 
mind? 

No, not really. We did not attract the 
major people that some of the larger law firms 
did, like Bobo Rockefeller and some of the 
celebrities that came here usually went to the 



Early Law Practice in Reno 


31 


larger firms. So ours was more the common 
person, and I don’t really remember any 
particular ones. 

What were the grounds that were acceptable 
under Nevada law at that time for divorce? 

Extreme mental cruelty. 

And that was it? 

Well, that was the one that was utilized. 
There were other grounds. There were several 
grounds, but that was the one that was 
utilized. 

I thought that was the natural state of 
matrimony. 

[laughter] 

I hope my wife doesn’t hear that. We have a 
very, very pleasant marriage, believe me. What 
other kinds of cases did your firm handle? 

We had a pretty good personal injury 
practice. There was one case that sure stuck 
out in my mind. The person’s name was Jim 
Caldwell. He had been thrown out of The 
Golden Hotel by a bouncer. The bouncer 
threw him out roughly, so that he fractured 
his hip on the concrete outside. Because 
Caldwell was thought to be sort of a derelict 
that had been sleeping in a chair, and so they 
were annoyed and threw him out. Actually, 
he was really not as much of a derelict as 
they had thought because he was a heavy 
equipment operator from Alaska, and he 
worked all during the summer in the season 
up there, and then he would come down here 
and gamble. 

They did not view him as an outstanding 
citizen so they just tossed him out and 


fractured his hip, and they offered him 
nothing in settlement. I tried the case, and I 
was really surprised because that was, I think 
about my second or third year, and I wasn’t 
all that confident in trial practice. I was very 
much intrigued by [Melvin] Beilis book on 
demonstrative evidence, and they weren’t 
using much demonstrative evidence around 
here at all, at that time. So I went heavy on 
it. I got medical drawings of the pin that they 
had to put in, and I brought the pin to court. 
I remember, I don’t know if this was good or 
not but it was fun to do, I had a skeleton that 
I’d gotten from the Veteran’s Administration, 
where he’d been treated, and they brought it 
down in a closet, so I just let “it sort of sit 
there the first couple of days of trial. And 
I’m sure the jury was wondering what’s in 
that closet so it was kind of fun to open it 
and there was this skeleton, which we could 
illustrate where the hipbone was broken. 

You had quite a flair for the dramatic. It 
must have come from early influences when 
you were reading about Clarence Darrow 
and so on. Would you like to continue about 
demonstrative evidence? 

Well, that’s right. I thought, and I 
did this in trying cases in subsequent 
years, I thought there always should be 
something, if I could think of anything that 
was pertinent as a physical exhibit, whether 
it was a model or whatever it was, to keep 
up jury interest, because if you just sort of 
drone along speaking and examining and 
cross-examining, the jury’s inclined to lose 
interest. I always thought that it contributed 
a lot if you could have some evidence that 
would bring home your point and keep the 
jury particularly interested. And I thought 
that this did. It was a case where, the cross- 
examination of the bouncer who threw him 



32 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


out, who was a pretty mean-looking guy, 
actually helped. 

The other thing that was funny about 
it is, I remember dressing up Caldwell in 
one of my suits because when the adjusters 
examined him, he appeared in pretty bad 
shape. He didn’t have very good clothes, with a 
scraggly beard and everything. Well, I got him 
all dressed up, and he loved it. And it turns 
out he at one time had been a song and dance 
man somewhere, so when he got up, dressed 
up in his suit, not only that, he added a little 
rosebud in the lapel of the suit when he came 
to court. So here was this “snappy dudie” guy 
that was a whole lot different than when the 
insurance company had seen him. But then 
he performed, he did well in telling what had 
happened and so the jury was kind of annoyed 
at the defendants. 

Jury verdicts then were small everywhere, 
but especially small in Nevada. The highest 
verdict in Washoe County ever was ninety- 
nine thousand dollars. That person really 
became a paraplegic and so I thought if we 
could get five thousand or something I would 
be pleased. When the jury came back, I 
thought they said fifty-three hundred dollars, 
but my partner, McKissick, who was with 
me said, “No, they said fifty-three thousand.” 
That just seemed like a whole lot of money 
to us. And it was good for him too because 
he left, and he bought a motel somewhere in 
the Northwest, so I was pleased that he did 
something significant with what he received. 

You had more success reforming Mr. Caldwell 
than you did with Bill the Booster, [laughter] 

Quite a lot more, [laughter] 

Personal injury cases like that took up quite a 
bit of your practice? 


Yes, we had quite an extensive personal 
injury practice and it kind of built up; if we 
were successful in one case that seemed to 
help in bringing on others. That kind of is 
the way our practice developed with what 
would happen to be known from a verdict 
or known otherwise. I remember one thing 
that brought in a lot of cases to me. It was a 
strange thing. I had been appointed to defend 
a person who was charged with escaping 
from Washington State Prison. Judge [Grant] 
Bowen had appointed me to defend this man. 
They were trying to extradite him. And so 
I went over and talked to him. He was in 
the Reno jail, and I said, “Well, how did it 
happen?” And he said, “I was working on a 
farm, and I just walked oft” I said, “Where 
was the farm?” He said, “It was over in 
Oregon. Just over the line.” I said, “Uh huh.” 
[laughter] 

The crime was committed in Oregon and 
so Washington couldn’t extradite him, so I 
filed a writ of habeas corpus that Judge Bowen 
granted, freeing the man. It just happened 
there was a newspaperman in the audience 
who was there to see another case and mine 
was heard ahead of time. He was intrigued by 
this thing, so he put this article on the back 
page of the paper about a young attorney 
freeing a man on habeas corpus. He thought 
that was kind of an intriguing deal. I think 
I got four or five clients who read that in the 
paper and thought, this fellow seems to know 
what he’s doing so I’ll get him. 

[laughter] Free advertising. 

That’s right. 

Was that the Reno Gazette? 

Yes. 



Early Law Practice in Reno 


33 


Now, cases like the personal injury cases, would 
those be handled on a contingency basis? 

Yes. 

What was, starting out as an attorney, how did 
a typical day go? 

Well, a typical day would be coming in 
to handle the cases that we had and, if it was 
a personal injury case, I would be working 
on researching the law or on developing the 
evidence. There were also transactions, wills, 
and contracts. Then we had some criminal 
cases that we were retained on. I remember 
there was a kidnap case in Fallon that we 
were retained to defend. That was kind of an 
interesting case. 

Tell us about it. 

I’ll talk about that for a while. The 
boy’s name was Nick Stanitz, and he was 
from Chicago. He was sixteen and the 
younger brother of a fellow who had been 
an outstanding athlete and was a celebrity in 
his school. This boy, I think, felt like he was a 
failure; he wasn’t living up to what his brother 
had done. So he kind of went wrong with a 
group of people who just decided to take off 
across the country. All of whom were older. 
They were eighteen, nineteen, and twenty- 
two. I think there were three besides him, 
and you could see where he would be sort 
of taken up with these older people. This 
distinction between a sixteen year old and a 
twenty-two year old is big. They went across 
the country and they were robbing service 
stations and doing a lot of stuff. They were 
arrested in Fallon, and they were imprisoned 
in the county jail there. The girl had a gun 
in her brassiere and [laughter] she came out 


and she pulled the gun and set them all free; 
and off the four of them went, stole a car, and 
they were off, escaped from the Churchill 
County jail. And, of course, this just was 
terribly embarrassing to the sheriff’s office 
and everyone there so they caught them, 
and they were charged with escape. Some of 
them, two of them, pled guilty and were given 
sentences of, I don’t know, twenty years or 
something. He didn’t plead guilty. He was, as I 
said, younger, and shouldn’t have been treated 
as an adult. He really hadn’t done anything. 
He’d just kind of gone along with it. 

The parents had hired an older lawyer here 
who had been a judge. The brother wanted to 
hire us, and so we all kind of participated in it 
together, except the older lawyer carried the 
ball, and kind of kept us in tow. And he never 
put the boy on the stand, and we thought 
that was a terrible mistake. Nor did he call 
the bishop at his church, who volunteered 
to come up and testify. He didn’t call them. 
I don’t know why; it was a tactical thing, a 
difference of opinion, both McKissick and I 
thought this is a terrible mistake. 

So he was convicted and sentenced to 
life in prison. We were just distraught with 
this because the boy was actually a nice boy. 
You could see what had happened to him. 
He had no prior criminal record or anything 
and here he had been caught up with these 
older people. All three in our firm started 
a big petition in the community to have his 
sentence commuted by the Board of Pardons. 
The Board of Pardons consisted of all of the 
supreme court justices, the governor, and 
the attorney general. The majority of that 
board can commute the sentence, but the 
governor has to agree. We built up a big fire 
in the community and got stuff in the press 
and got petitions forwarded around and we 
brought it to the pardon board, and they did 



34 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


commute the sentence to one year. We were 
really upset about the original conviction, 
because we thought this was a terrible result, 
and we had participated in it. The pardon 
boards commutation was just. 

The boy’s family must have been beside 
themselves. 

Oh, they were. They hired us after that. 

And that must have been all over the newspapers, 
too. That must have helped the firm. 

It was. Yes. 

Quite a change from a life sentence to one year. 
Wonder what happened to that kid. 

You know, I never heard after that. I would 
be really anxious to know too. We’ll look that 
up sometime. 

If you were researching a case in a typical day, 
did your firm have a law library or did you have 
to go over to the local law library? 

We had a pretty limited library. We used 
the local library a lot. 

That’s here in Reno? 

Yes. At the courthouse. 

Did you get to know any judges? You spent 
a lot of time as a litigator in and around the 
courthouse. You must have gotten to know 
some judges at that time. 

Oh, yes. Sure. 

Any particular ones that stand out from this 
early period? 


Yes. We had some very good judges, I 
thought. State court judges and a federal 
judge. The federal judge was Bruce Thompson. 
He was outstanding. Grant Bowen was a 
judge here for over twenty years, and he was 
excellent. He had kind of a grumpy way of 
doing things, but doing it very, very fairly, 
and you could always count on the fact that 
if you had a good legal argument, he’d sure 
see it. And John Barrett, who also was very 
smart, very fair. Clel Georgetta also was a very 
good judge. He had practiced here and was 
excellent. Judge Emile Geslin was excellent. 
They all were very good, and our [Nevada] 
supreme court justices were great too. When 
I was first starting to practice, it was Frank 
McNamee, Milton Batt, and Charlie Merrill, 
who later became a federal court of appeals 
judge, and whose place I took on the Ninth 
Circuit Court of Appeals. 

Oh that’s interesting. 

He was a wonderfully fair judge, too. But 
one state judge, I sure shouldn’t overlook 
mentioning, is John Gabrielli because 
sometime later I had a case that he played a 
big part in, but he was excellent; a very, very 
good judge. We were just blessed with very 
good state judges. 

A strong bench. 

Yes. 



5 


State Politics and the 
Gaming Control Act 


In these early years, you were with Springer 
and McKissick for about five years, I think you 
told me? 

Yes. At that time, we were quite politically 
active. Howard McKissick was a Republican, 
and he had been elected to the Assembly, 
state assembly. And later became the minority 
leader of the Republican Party in the Assembly. 
He was quite influential. And Charlie Springer 
and I were both Democrats, and we did quite 
a few things in politics. At one time, I was the 
county president of the Young Democrats, 
and I was the vice president of the state 
Young Democrats. One that was fun was that 
Charlie and I decided that it would be a fun 
thing to do to see if we could take over the 
leadership of the Washoe County Democrats. 
It had been in the hands of the old guard, 
and we decided they needed new blood. So 
what we did was we figured that the key was 
the precinct places, and it had always been 
in the past that the chairman of the Washoe 
County Democrats would designate precinct 
places. But when we got looking at the statute 


it was really the whole of the Washoe County 
Democratic Central Committee that was 
supposed to designate the precinct places. 

We had a meeting of the Central 
Committee, and they were somewhat 
dissatisfied with the current leadership, and 
so the Central Committee designated precinct 
places that we felt were great, because lots of 
people were going to show up at the precinct 
places. You’re there and your friends are 
there who elect the delegates to the County 
Convention. So, we had our county convention 
made up of persons selected that way. The 
chairman of the Washoe County Democrats 
and the old guard didn’t go for that at all. They 
designated their own precinct places, and 
they had their own County Convention. So 
we now had two county conventions to go to 
Ely, Nevada, for the state convention and then 
to determine which one’s delegates would be 
seated at the state convention. As it turned 
out, the “old guard” I was talking about was 
actually the partners of the firm I later joined, 
[laughter] So we went, and we presented our 
case and the other side presented their case, 



36 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


and we had a committee hearing to determine 
which group they were going to seat. They 
seated our group. This was in the year that 
Grant Sawyer, who was a young man, was 
going to be running for governor. That was 
very exciting. We became part of the Sawyer 
team and, eventually, Governor Sawyer was 
elected. 

This was also the year that the persons 
were going to the National Convention. The 
key was whether it was going to be Johnson 
or Kennedy and so those were exciting 
years. But one of the funny things about the 
Washoe Convention, where we did this, was 
that Charlie Springer, who was always very 
quotable in speeches, was making a speech 
and he then got carried away and referred to 
the existing governor who was a Republican 
as “a man of low brain wattage.” [laughter] 
This got quoted in the newspaper. You can 
just imagine how this affected our firm. 
Because of Howard McKissick, we had this 
very nice retainer representing the State 
Gaming Commission; Howard McKissick 
had gotten this from the governor who 
did not appreciate being referred to in that 
manner. I know the next morning after that 
had all occurred, McKissick came over, I 
was over at Springers house, and he came 
over waving the paper saying, “Look, I got 
a call from the governor and our retainer is 
terminated.” [laughter] So it didn’t all work 
out too well, some of that. 

Politics cuts both ways, doesn’t it? It’s a two- 
edged sword. That’s a great story. Now why do 
you think, was there a lot of behind the scenes 
maneuvering to get your delegates seated? 

Yes. Oh yes. There was, and we tried 
to maneuver as much as we could but, I 
think part of it was the fact that part of the 
Sawyer forces wanted us seated and other 


forces who wanted other candidates for 
governor were pressing elsewhere, and that 
was part of it. I know that Bill Woodburn 
and Virgil Wedge were sent home and much 
later, Bill Woodburn and Virgil Wedge were 
my partners in the next firm I went with, 
[laughter] 

Did this tend to break down along age lines? 
Generations? Was this a generational fight in 
the party? 

It was. Yes. It was, actually. 

Because Grant Sawyer was a young man at 
the time? 

Yes. And it was kind of the new blood 
was going to do wonderful things for the 
Democratic Party. 

Were you a Kennedy Democrat at that time? 
Yes. 

And the other side, were they Johnson people? 

Yes. They were, actually 

Did you get selected to go to the National 
Convention? 

No, and I was crushed. But I could 
see that there were other people who had 
certainly worked longer and harder for the 
Democratic Party. I was so happy that our 
delegation got seated that I graciously gave up. 
[laughter] I don’t know if it would have made 
any difference. They probably wouldn’t have 
selected me anyway, and I thought it would 
have been kind of unfair to press it when a lot 
of other people had worked longer and harder 
for the Democratic Party than I ever had. 



State Politics and the Gaming Control Act 


37 


Of course, that year the convention was 
in Los Angeles and John Kennedy was the 
nominee and Lyndon Johnson became the vice- 
presidential nominee. 

Springer went to that. I think that was 
another reason, they couldn’t select both of 
us. And Springer, of the two of us, he was the 
one that should have gone. 

Did this contribute to the breakup of your firm? 

No. No. Our firm broke up because 
Charlie Springer had an opportunity to be 
appointed to fill the remainder of the term 
of Roger Foley who was appointed as a new 
federal judge in Las Vegas. Roger Foley had 
been the attorney general, and he had nine 
months left on his term of office. Governor 
Sawyer said that he would appoint Charlie 
Springer if he wanted it, and Charlie wanted 
it. Harry McKissick had, right about that 
time, become quite ill and had some health 
problems and could not practice. That was, to 
think about it, a hard nine months, because I 
was running a three-person practice, except 
Roger Newton had come in as an associate 
in the firm. So Roger and I were running 
this practice, which by that time, was a pretty 
busy practice and that was very demanding. I 
remember getting up at three in the morning 
to do stuff because it was very demanding to 
try to keep up with the schedule the other 
two had had and didn’t realize that they 
were going to be gone while things were 
scheduled. So it was between the two of us. 
One of the things you’d be interested in is the 
firm name, Springer McKissick & Hug. Herb 
Caen, a noted columnist for the San Francisco 
Chronicle, thought that our firm name was a 
neat name for a divorce firm, Spring, Kiss & 
Hug. He put a little something in his article, 
his column. Then, when Roger Newton 


joined, he had another little column. He said 
that he “noted that a touch of gravity had been 
added to his favorite firm.” [laughter] 

Oh, I wonder if that brought you any business 
from the Bay Area. 

I think it might have. 

Your firm at that time was on retainer from 
the Nevada State Gaming Commission. Is that 
right? 

Yes. 

Tell me, how did that come about? 

Well, it had come about before I actually 
joined the firm, I think about the year before. 
And Springer and McKissick had been 
retained to represent the state in conducting 
investigations with regard to applicants for 
gaming licenses and also for any verifications 
or disciplinary proceedings that might 
evolve. Actually, I never really was involved 
with that either, when I came with the firm 
the other two, Springer and McKissick, did 
some additional work and then, as I think 
I’ve related, it was abruptly terminated when 
Charlie Springer made the speech at the 
[state] Democratic Convention. I think I’ve 
related what happened. 

Yes, as I recall, Mr. Springer cast some 
aspersions on the Republican governor at the 
time. 

Yes. Yes. He thought the governor was 
a person of “low brain wattage.” [laughter] 
That was one thing about Charlie Springer, 
he always could utter quotable lines, and of 
course that hit the papers. That ended our 
continuing with the gaming commission. 



38 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


I see. Well, that would do it. [laughter] I 
wouldn’t be a bit surprised by that. But you 
yourself really didn’t have any of that business. 

I didn’t. I did have some later involvement. 
Our firm became interested in the Gaming 
Control Act from that experience. And Harry 
McKissick was, at that time, an assemblyman 
in the legislature, and we sort of all three 
decided it would be a good idea to draft a 
new gaming act, no doubt with the hope that 
this would attract some gaming clients too, 
I suspect, but in any event, we set out to do 
it. We got the help of an administrative law 
expert from the University of California who 
worked with us, and we did draft the act that 
really is the framework of the present Gaming 
Control Act of Nevada. Establishing a Gaming 
Commission, which were part-time persons 
who were notable and responsible people that 
the governor appointed for staggered terms, 
and then a Gaming Control Board that was a 
full-time commission who were responsible 
for the investigations and that sort of thing. 
The Act has been amended some since, but 
the basic framework is the same as when we 
drafted it. 

When did that act take effect. Do you recall? 

I was trying to think. I would suspect it 
was about 1962, but I haven’t looked back and 
I’m not sure of that. 

And what was your intent with this act? Were 
there problems that you saw in the gaming that 
needed correction? 

Yes, one of the main things was that 
the final hearing board was the state Tax 
Commission and that really didn’t work out, 
and one of the things that we wanted to do 
was to establish a separate body that would be 


responsible for hearing and making the final 
decisions on gaming applications, gaming 
verifications, and so forth. This was the 
Gaming Commission that we wrote in the act. 
Then, we also wrote some procedures that had 
to be followed. Our real concern was the fact 
that gaming regulation is a tricky business, but 
it’s essential; and, Nevada really has done an 
excellent job at looking into and investigating, 
very, very thoroughly, the people and their 
backgrounds who are applying for gaming 
applications to see if they have any ties with 
the underworld element and excluding 
anyone who does and excluding anyone or 
revoking a license of persons who associated 
with criminal elements. For example, Frank 
Sinatra’s license was revoked at Fake Tahoe 
because of his connection with a known 
mobster. 

There’s recently been a book, I think it just came 
out from the University of Wisconsin Press by 
two historians investigating gaming control in 
Nevada, and the book has a title something like 
The Black Book. 

That’s right. 

And apparently there was. 

There was a black book. 

There was a black book? 

I think there still is a black book. 

And can you tell me about that, what you know. 

Well, those are persons who are not to 
be allowed in the casinos because of their 
relationship with the underworld, which 
Nevadans had thought endangered the 
whole gaming industry, and therefore the 



State Politics and the Gaming Control Act 


39 


casinos would not allow those persons in. 
It was trying to avoid the situation where 
there would be a sub-rosa control of casinos 
by underworld elements, and I think quite 
successfully. 

What in your estimation has been the impact 
of gaming on the state? 

Well, it’s been a tremendous impact. 
The major industry of the state is the tourist 
industry, and it’s founded largely on attracting 
gaming persons who are interested to coming 
to this unique kind of entertainment. The 
hotels are largely based on this kind of a 
tourist attraction. 

One of the shifts that appear to be occurring 
now is more of a family orientation to the 
tourism and the gaming industry. What effects 
do you see this having on the state or on tourism 
as a whole? 

Well, Las Vegas is particularly 
experimenting with that, and I think that 
it has not proved as successful as they had 
hoped in that regard because gaming and 
families don’t work all that well together. I 
mean, I suppose the idea is to have a place 
where you can leave the kids and go play 
the slot machines, but it may be working 
better than I think. I don’t know. They seem 
somewhat incongruous to me, but certainly 
I see MGM and a number of the places there 
have Disneyland kind of attractions, and it 
may well be that it works out. We’ll see. Reno 
hasn’t done that much. 




6 


The Nevada Board of Regents 


Along with this experience working to pass 
legislation in state government, you’ve also been 
involved in state government in other ways. 

Yes. I’ll back you up a little bit on that to 
the university experience. In I960,1 ran for 
the Board of Regents. I had been president 
of the Alumni Association the year before. I 
guess it was kind of a faint hope on my part 
but I wanted to get into the political arena, 
and I was very interested in the university, but 
I just came out of law school, I was twenty- 
eight years old and I thought, well, I’ll run 
for the Board of Regents. The thing that had 
encouraged me was there were two positions 
that were open, and I ran for the two positions 
in Washoe County at that time. One was Dr. 
Fred Anderson, who actually was a good 
friend of mine. I really had no hope of beating 
him, nor did I especially want to. The other, 
Newt Crumley, who was reputedly going to 
run for governor; that was all the rumor that 
he was going to any minute file for governor. 
So I filed for the position thinking that Newt 
Crumley, who was a very well-known state 


figure and owned the local Holiday Hotel and 
was a rancher and was a very nice person, 
but he decided, instead, to file for regent and 
then there were six of us running. I think 
some others had decided the same thing. I 
had no money really for a campaign, but I got 
some stickers out, signboards, and conducted 
a pretty vigorous campaign with leaflets, 
door-to-door sorts of things. In the primary, 
I actually did very well. I was very close to the 
other two, but that spurred Newt Crumley 
on so he put on about twenty thousand 
dollars worth of TV advertising, and so he 
and Fred Anderson were both elected. But I 
didn’t feel too bad about that because I had 
come in fairly close in the general. Then, 
unfortunately, Newt Crumley was in a plane 
crash about two years later, about 1962, and 
was killed. Governor Sawyer had to appoint 
someone to fill the Regents slot, and he 
appointed me because I had come in third in 
that last race. That started out my career on 
the Board of Regents in 1962. 

I was reelected several times and served 
there for ten years as a regent at the university. I 



42 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


really enjoyed that. That was a very significant 
part of my career background. I was chairman 
of the board the last two years, and then 
you asked me about being deputy attorney 
general. They changed the election procedure 
to redistrict it. And it turned out there was 
only one position open for Washoe County 
so that my friend, Dr. Fred Anderson, and I 
would have to run against each other for one 
slot. I didn’t really want to do that, and he’d 
been chairman just before me and, he was 
a very good friend. There was actually an 
opening for a position for university attorney, 
who was a joint appointment of the attorney 
general’s office and the Board of Regents. And, 
I thought, well that would keep my association 
with the university; I’d like to do it. So that 
did happen and I was appointed as a deputy 
attorney general to be general counsel for the 
university on a retainer basis and that’s what 
I did for the next four years. And I enjoyed 
that too. 

During the time that I was on the Board 
of Regents of the University System, it’s the 
whole state system, the board did some rather 
exciting things that I feel I had a part in that 
I’m proud of. One was that we developed the 
University of Nevada in Las Vegas. And, at the 
time, when I first came on the board, it was 
just a school with a dean that was associated 
with the University of Nevada here in Reno. 
During the course of that ten-year period it 
really became a full-fledged university with a 
president and also the same Board of Regents 
responsible for it, and developed a campus. 
We organized a foundation with two persons 
who in Las Vegas had a creative idea that 
it would be very important to acquire the 
land around where this campus was. There 
were just two buildings at this time on the 
university campus. It was very small, but there 
was a whole block of land around it and Perry 
Thomas and Jerry Mack were involved with a 


bank down there. At that time, it was Valley 
Bank, and they were willing to go around to 
get options on all of this property, and, if we 
had a foundation, we could acquire the land 
as the bank exercised their options. It would 
prevent the difficult problem that universities 
always face and that is that the minute the 
university wants the land it increases in 
value about three times; so all the land was 
optioned. Actually, I drew up the papers for 
the foundation, and got it started. I think I 
was the first secretary of it, and we acquired 
all the land around it for eleven thousand 
dollars an acre, which was a very good thing. 
If we were to try to do anything like that now, 
acquire some additional land, it would be 
very, very difficult. So that was one thing that 
was developed. 

Another thing that was developed was we 
were anxious to establish a medical school 
because Nevada students were having a very 
difficult time getting into medical schools in 
other states. There would be some extremely 
qualified people who just couldn’t get in 
because of the limited out-of-state enrollment 
that other state universities have and the 
extreme competition from the private schools. 
At the key time, Paul Laxalt, who was then 
the governor, had a relationship with Howard 
Hughes and no doubt got Hughes interested 
in university projects. In any event, Howard 
Hughes read about this in the paper, and he 
said that he would be willing to contribute 
two hundred thousand toward establishing 
a medical school. Well, at that time, that was 
a more significant amount of money than it 
is now, and it stimulated the legislature into 
thinking about it and others into thinking 
about it and got the ball rolling for a medical 
school. 

At that time our theory was to establish 
a two-year medical school. There were six, 
two-year medical schools in the country 



The Nevada Board of Regents 


43 


at that time and what they did was, they 
would conduct the first two years, which 
were academic years, and the second two 
years transfer to a medical school for clinical 
years. We would then feed our graduates into 
the schools where people had dropped out. 
There were vacancies that occurred. Those six 
schools were doing very well and we felt that 
it would work out for us, and it did. However, 
it got to be difficult raising money, finding 
money. Mr. Mansfield advanced it a great deal 
by making a pre-designation of a trust he had 
with a gift on his death of $1 million. That 
helped a lot. We hired a dean who was very 
good at not only helping with the fund raising, 
but getting through the very complicated 
things of getting it accredited. That’s a huge 
problem. Las Vegas resisted it because it was 
going to be on the Reno campus. The Las 
Vegas campus had now grown, and they 
didn’t want to see the medical school put on 
the Reno campus. One of the crucial defining 
moments was a joint session of the legislature, 
the senate and the assembly, and we all went 
over and made talks. Howard McKissick, by 
the way, was in the assembly at that time, and 
my father was in the senate, and they both 
worked really hard for it. Eventually, it passed 
by one vote. 

So the medical school was established. It 
proved to be a real success. It was a two-year 
school for about, I’m just thinking back, but 
maybe four or five years, and then things 
changed on the national scene so that the 
two-year schools were not getting the federal 
money that they had previously gotten. So 
then the question became whether we could 
make it into a four-year school. Fortunately, 
we were able to do that, and the four-year 
medical school was established. Actually it is 
no longer resisted at all in Las Vegas, because a 
lot of the programs are conducted from there 
too. Some residency programs and some of 


the clinical programs during medical school 
are conducted there and so it’s worked out to 
be a very successful thing. Besides, an awful 
lot of Las Vegas students were able to go to 
medical school who would have not been able 
to. I’m very pleased because my daughter went 
to medical school up here a number of years 
later. 

Oh really? 

Graduated and became a doctor, and so 
did her husband so I have a lot of association 
with that. The medical school recently had its 
twenty-five-year anniversary. That was a year 
ago. I was pleased to be asked to make the 
graduation address, and I was happy to do so 
because I have an awful lot of fond memories 
of that being established. 

What a wonderful achievement. I mean 
something like that is really so important to 
a small state like Nevada that is essentially a 
rural state. 

We now have about two hundred fifty 
applicants a year for the medical school. It 
has about fifty slots. So you can see that there 
had been a real need actually as it turned out. 
I was on their board of visitors for a number 
of years even after I was on the bench. So I 
have maintained a continuing interest in the 
Nevada Medical School. One of the other 
things that occurred during that time on the 
Board of Regents was, and we worked hard 
for, was to get the National Judicial College 
located in Reno. It had been located in 
Denver the first year. Justice Tom Clark had 
been very instrumental in continuing judicial 
education. He had really been the driving 
force in establishing the Federal Judicial 
Center and also for this college that was in 
Denver, the National Judicial College, for state 



44 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


courts. We talked to him a lot about hopefully 
getting it established on the Reno campus. 
The big key was the Fleischmann Foundation 
here in Nevada that did tremendous amount 
of good, seed money for a lot of projects. This 
was one of them that they were very interested 
in. They were crucial, too. Because with a 
Fleischmann grant for twenty years, we were 
able to entice the National Judicial College to 
establish its headquarters in conjunction with 
the University of Nevada. The Fleischmann 
Foundation financed a building for it and then 
an annual funding, my recollection is, three 
hundred thousand a year. That has been a 
tremendously successful organization thanks 
to the very able persons who ran it, and are 
continuing to run it now. It’s been very good for 
Reno because judges from all over the country 
come to take their initial education course, 
which is six weeks, and then there are graduate 
courses. So Reno is sending out ambassadors 
all over the country. People who come to 
Reno and say, “You know, Reno is really a nice 
place. It isn’t just a mecca for gambling. It has 
wonderful recreational opportunities.” We 
encourage them to bring their families. The 
judicial college has programs for the families 
that they run. I served on that board for two 
years too, and I enjoyed that. But what I was 
very pleased about was that we were able to 
get it to come to Reno. 

That’s quite a coup and a feather in your cap 
for that. 

Not mine especially, but I worked with 
people who helped do it. There were a number 
of others that were as instrumental as I, but I 
just feel happy to have participated. The other 
thing that we did during that ten years that was 
significant, and this was again, in large part 
through the help of Governor Paul Laxalt and 
Howard Hughes, was to establish a community 


college system, and that community college 
system is in Reno, Las Vegas, Carson City, 
and Elko, and then conducts programs in 
other rural cities throughout the state and 
that has served a real need for adult education 
in particular. People who are going back to 
get retraining, as well as persons who have 
just graduated from high school, but it has 
served a real need for an alternate education 
to the strictly university courses. It’s been very 
successful. Its total population of students is 
larger than both universities. 

That’s excellent. Let me back up a little bit and 
ask you a little bit more. Is it a year-round 
program? 

It is. Its principal thrust is in the summer, 
but it conducts these courses throughout the 
year. It also conducts courses for visitors from 
foreign countries too, Russians and many 
other countries whose judges have come to 
this program. They’ve established a wonderful 
esprit de corps because the participants are a 
very hard working group. When the judges 
come it’s no vacation really. It’s a full day’s 
work and a no-nonsense kind of program, and 
the judges appreciate it that way. The faculty 
has been wonderful throughout the years, and 
has really contributed significantly to judicial 
education for the states. 

So the National Judicial College is primarily 
for state judges? 

It is. And principally state trial judges. 
And how is a judge selected to go to the school? 

Well, the application is made. Most of the 
states will fund the education program for 
their judges. There are a few judges who have 
to pay their way, but generally it is funded 



The Nevada Board of Regents 


45 


by the states involved. There are a limited 
number in a class, but they’re able to take care 
of I think most all the applicants. 

And what sort of classes are offered? 

Well, classes in evidence, case 
management, criminal law, injunctions. All 
the sorts of things that a trial judge is going 
encounter, jury selection, that kind of thing. 

So, correct me if I’m wrong. Is the emphasis 
then on procedural matters, rather than specific 
laws, because the laws would vary from state 
to state? 

Both. They do have substantive law 
sessions too, particularly in areas that are 
complex, like criminal law is going to be 
somewhat the same everywhere, property law 
and so forth, and then the graduate courses 
take specialized areas that the person may 
be particularly interested in and wants to 
re-attend. They have a lot of judges who’ve 
returned. Some of them return to teach after 
that. 

That leads to my next question. Who’s on the 
faculty? Who makes up the faculty? Is it other 
judges? Is it law professors? 

There are a core of faculty and 
administration and then there are a large 
number of judges who devote their time 
gratis teaching these courses. A lot of them 
have become federal judges since, and we still 
have a few federal judges that come back and 
teach at the college. Judge [James] Burns from 
Oregon is one. He comes every year. 

It sounds like a great experience. When the 
course of study is complete is there some sort of 
certification or degree or something like that? 


There is a certificate that is given, and 
they have a little ceremony, a graduation kind 
of ceremony. They usually have a speaker 
of some note. I think it’s made known that 
if you don’t come to all the classes and do 
your homework, you’re not going to get your 
certificate, so if you go back to your state 
without a certificate, it’s not going to look 
good. It doesn’t really happen, but the fact 
of the matter is, as I mentioned, there’s a real 
esprit de corps for those judges that come out 
and really dig in and work. 

Do you think this is leading towards a kind of 
standardization of judicial practice throughout 
the states? 

No, but I think what it does is help all of the 
judges to realize the most effective methods of 
handling things, and, also, that initial course 
is an awfully good course to break someone 
in to being a judge that has been an attorney. 
There’s quite a little difference, and it bridges 
that gap. 

I’ll want to, later on, explore your own transition 
from private practice to the bench. I want to stay 
a little bit more with your experience with the 
Board of Regents, and you were talking before 
about one of the achievements while you were 
on the Board of Regents was the establishment 
of the community college system. Could you 
briefly describe your particular involvement 
in that? 

We really worked for that, very hard 
as a board, and my involvement was being 
very much in favor of it and in encouraging 
Governor Laxalt to proceed with it. Then my 
later involvement was after we did get the 
funding from the legislature. Oh, and, also, 
I appeared before the legislature in testifying 
for it. Then, after we got the funds in setting 



46 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


up the mechanism for how it was going to 
be administered, we had a president of the 
community college system that reported to 
the Board of Regents and then that president 
would, in turn, be responsible for all of the 
community colleges throughout the state. 
And, of course, there would be individual 
presidents of the campuses, but he was the 
president of the system. We set that up, and I 
had a significant hand in working all that out. 

Structurally, the Board of Regents had how 
many members? Do you recall at the time? 

Yes, we had nine when I was initially on 
it but it was later expanded to eleven. 

And obviously they were elected, but were they 
elected by county or is the state divided into 
some sort of legislative districts? 

When I first ran, it was divided into 
districts. There were three regents from 
Washoe County. Reno is in Washoe County. 
And there were three from Las Vegas. That’s 
Clark County. And there were three from 
the remainder of the state. And they ran 
county wide initially. So the three of us would 
run in Washoe County, but the terms were 
somewhat staggered, and I’m not sure why it 
was that we had two run at one time because 
the third one came up at a later time, but in 
any event, that’s the way it worked out. 

And it sounds like the regents, or at least the 
districts, were chosen on the basis of population. 
Is that right? 

Yes. When the one-man/one-vote rule 
became necessary as a result of the Supreme 
Court ruling, then the regents were divided 
into smaller districts. There would be several, 
three districts in Washoe County, three in 


Las Vegas, and three throughout the state. 
There would be eastern Nevada, western 
Nevada, and so forth. Then there was a 
further redistricting because of the fact that 
the population had increased so much in 
Las Vegas; and that’s when the regents in 
Washoe County were limited to two and two 
throughout the remainder of the state and the 
rest in Las Vegas because the population is so 
large. 

Right. And continues to grow. 

Yes. 

In addition to having served on the Board of 
Regents for the University of Nevada, you were 
also active on the Board of Directors on the 
National Association of College and University 
Attorneys. Is that right? 

Yes. 

Tell me about that. 

Well, it happened that they were going to 
form an organization nationwide of university 
attorneys, and we did have a representative 
from the attorney general’s office that advised 
the university periodically. What the board 
thought of was, since I was an attorney that I 
should go as well. So the two of us went, and 
we were charter members of this organization. 
At that time, lots of the universities didn’t 
really have their own attorneys. There didn’t 
seem to be that many legal problems. Later, 
it developed that there became lots of legal 
problems, but at that time there were not as 
many. So, it was an organization to exchange 
notes and experiences and to learn from 
what other universities were experiencing. 
It became a very fortunate thing, very 
swiftly, because that’s when all of the campus 



The Nevada Board of Regents 


47 


difficulties stirred up during the Vietnam War, 
like the Mario Savio leadership with Berkeley. 
We were in contact with the university 
attorney there, and we were learning from 
the experiences that other campuses were 
having with demonstrations, breaking in 
the buildings, damage problems, and exactly 
how to deal with it; and yet how to preserve 
the free speech rights of the students, the 
demonstrators, and the faculty. So that was 
a very valuable thing for the next couple 
of years to have these sessions. We would 
have educational sessions about dealing 
with that kind of a problem, particularly 
the Vietnam kind of problems. There was 
also a racial problem at that time too and it 
kind of combined. This was the time of the 
Black Panthers and that sort of thing so we 
were having to advise our own colleges and 
universities as to how to proceed with these 
two very difficult situations. 

Well it sounds like this was a challenging time. 

It was. 

Were there demonstrations opposing the 
Vietnam War on the campuses here in Reno 
and Las Vegas? 

Yes. Particularly at Reno. They had an 
incident that created a real problem for quite 
a little while. There were demonstrations 
periodically, mostly ones that focused on the 
Vietnam War problem. There was an annual 
event that the university here in Reno had 
been putting on for years. They called it 
Governor’s Day for the ROTC. It was to award 
the special honors to those students who had 
earned them and to recognize the ROTC, and, 
of course, lots of these people were going to be 
going on to Vietnam. And there were counter 
demonstrations, as I recall, for two years, but 


at a different part of the campus, and they 
were students who opposed the war and who 
wanted to make this known. So, that worked 
out fairly well with the football stadium where 
they would have the Governor’s Day Award 
for the military, and then another part of the 
campus where they had the demonstrations 
for those who were very much opposed to the 
war. 

That worked well until one year, and it 
was the same year as Kent State occurred 
[in 1970]. It was about five days after the 
shooting of students at Kent State. One of 
the professors, Professor Adamian, who was 
with the group that was demonstrating in the 
other area of the campus, got them stirred up 
to leave and march up and show them at the 
Governors Day celebration at the stadium. 

So there were about three or four hundred 
students in there and a number of faculty, and 
they were marching up in that direction and it 
was about the time that there was a motorcade 
carrying the governor and others and there 
was a real danger they were going to start 
rocking the cars and so forth. They did, one of 
the students, with Adamians encouragement, 
laid down in front of the car, and you could 
just see what could happen by some accident 
taking place there. And that was serious. I 
know I went over and talked to one of the 
very responsible faculty persons, Jim Hulse, 
who was with them and opposed the war, as 
many did. 

As a matter of fact, by that time, I was 
opposed to the war too. That didn’t mean that 
we were out of the war. The ROTC people 
were obligated to go there. That was what 
our country had directed them to do. But 
anyway, I spoke to him and I said, “You know 
we’ve got a real problem coming here. It could 
blow up” and so we had agreed that rather 
than hold them out at the gates some way 
that if they would go in and march around 



48 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


the field three times and out that that would 
show their feeling about the war and their 
counter-demonstration and would avoid a 
controversy. Well, it seemed like a good idea, 
and maybe it wasn’t a good idea. It seemed 
like a good idea. 

Professor Adamian, instead, led them up 
into the stands, kind of like a cheerleader, and 
then he proceeded to disrupt the ceremony. 
And then the most frightening part about it 
was when he said, “Let’s go out onto the field.” 
The ROTC were drilling out there with fixed 
bayonets and these students that he led out 
onto the field were very close to them, and 
what was the horror in my mind is that it just 
took somebody tipping a hat, and we could 
have another Kent State kind of operation 
on our hands right there. A lot of this was on 
TV and, of course, the community was wildly 
upset so we insisted disciplinary proceedings 
begin against Professor Adamian. 

Well, a very complicated structure that 
had been adopted by many universities that 
the American Association of University 
Professors had sponsored, which was that a 
hearing was held before a group of professors, 
and then it would go to the president and 
then the board. The community was a little 
upset with the time it took, but that was our 
procedure and that’s what we had to do. The 
committee recommended that Professor 
Adamian receive disciplinary action, but 
not be terminated. The president agreed. 
The board did not agree and terminated 
him. But during the course of this time 
there were lots of meetings where students 
demonstrated in front of the board and were 
championing Professor Adamian, and some 
of the professors were too. But we as a board 
felt it was essential to hold the line, and 
we felt that it was the responsibility of the 
faculty to prevent this kind of incident that 


had happened at Kent State and happened 
at other universities where professors were 
actually leading to irresponsible action. It 
was more than just an expression of opinion, 
so he was terminated. He had been just very 
recently granted tenure. And he filed suit and 
actually Charlie Springer was his attorney that 
had filed the suit for him. Summary judgment 
was granted by Judge Foley for him, which 
would reinstate him, and I think compensate 
him fifty thousand dollars back pay 

That was appealed and the Ninth Circuit 
Court of Appeals reversed that, and then 
it came back for a trial. The trial was held. 
Judge [Howard B.] Turrentine came in from 
[the Southern District of] California and 
tried the case. Bruce Thompson had recused 
himself because he had been a member of 
the Board of Regents some years before, 
and so Judge Turrentine came in and tried 
it. He affirmed the university position that 
it was appropriate to terminate him and so 
ruled against Adamian. Some number of us 
were witnesses. I was a witness. It was a very 
unpleasant experience, all of this. 

Then that decision was appealed to the 
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. About that 
time, I was appointed to the Ninth Circuit 
Court of Appeals. This created a problem. It 
was about the first year I was there, I think. 
And so the judges on the Ninth Circuit Court 
of Appeals recused themselves, and they 
brought in judges from the Tenth Circuit to 
hear the case, and the district court decision 
that Adamian was properly terminated was 
affirmed. I would say the Adamian incident 
took at least ten years winding its way. 

Good heavens. It doesn’t sound like a pleasant 
experience at all, and it dragged on for so 
long. You mentioned that originally a separate 
area had been set-aside on campus at Reno 



The Nevada Board of Regents 


49 


for anti-war demonstrations that would take 
place simultaneously with the Governor’s Day 
celebration. 

Yes. 

Was that your idea to set up a special free 
speech area or do you know how that came 
about? 

I don’t know. I suspect it wasn’t my idea. I 
thought it was a very good idea, but I believe 
it was the president of the university’s idea. 

I see. Well, because it did involve the ROTC 
and you yourself had been part of that same 
ROTC unit. 

I had at an earlier stage, way back when. 

You must have had mixed feelings about all 
of this. 

Yes. I did, because I could understand 
why the country calls on you to represent 
your country in the military, the same way 
when I felt I was obligated to go at the time 
of the Korean War. So I could see exactly that 
it’s very important, the ROTC program. And 
yet I had mixed feelings with part of it. I did 
agree at that time with the students that the 
war was a terrible mistake, and we should 
be getting out of it as quickly as we could. 
I wouldn’t say that I was among the first to 
arrive at that conclusion. I was probably about 
in the middle of those who realized it was a 
bad mistake. 

An interesting point in connection with 
that was when the Bay of Tonkin occurred, 
and President Johnson said we must now 
go in and send in our troops and fight this 
battle. There was a Professor Erling Skorpin, 


who was a philosophy professor, and he gave 
a speech that was widely reported in the press 
saying, “We don’t know what really occurred 
in Vietnam, and we should be questioning 
this, and before we get deeply involved, we 
should find out if this is a justified action,” 
and elaborated to some extent in that vein. 
Well, at that point, the community was very 
upset. We had all kinds of calls about this 
Erling Skorpin. He’s got to be fired because 
he’s opposing the President of the United 
States and a military decision and this kind 
of thing you can’t sustain. That was the time 
of the John Birch Society, and we got many 
critical letters. 

Dr. Skorpin then gave a speech before the 
Alumni Association, and I went up to hear 
it, and he made a lot of sense, but my own 
view, at that time, was this man is expressing 
his opinion, but he was obviously wrong but, 
[laughter] I thought, that’s the important thing 
in our United States is the ability to express 
dissenting opinions, and you know sometimes 
those dissenting opinions turn out to be right. 
But my view was then we have to protect 
this man’s freedom of speech, although he’s 
obviously dead wrong, [laughter] And I think 
a lot of us felt that way. We upheld his right 
to speak, and we got all kinds of heat from a 
lot of people in the community at that time. 
But I’ve just thought since, what a wonderful 
lesson that is in our First Amendment free 
speech rights. The kind of things John Stuart 
Mill talked about, the importance of dissent, 
because Dr. Skorpin was right. He was exactly 
right. And he was a very unpopular man for 
it. But he stood up for what he believed, and 
he was exactly right. I’ve always carried that 
in the back of my mind. Some day I’d like to 
talk to him about it. He then left a couple of 
years later and went to one of the Montana 
schools, I believe. But it wasn’t because he 



50 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


was forced out. He had another opportunity. 
But that’s a good lesson for all of us. 

Yes it is. If the First Amendment doesn’t protect 
unpopular views, then it seems to me that the 
whole notion of freedom of speech is fairly 
hollow. 

That’s right. 

That is a good lesson. You mentioned at this 
time too, in addition to a lot of organized and 
unorganized opposition to the Vietnam War 
while you served on the Board of Regents and 
as university attorney, this is also a time of 
racial tension and racial unrest. Are there any 
incidents that you recall from this period? 

Yes. There was one particular incident. 
There was a football player, Jesse Satwite. 
He was a big guy He was a lineman. And he 
was charged with going in and intimidating 
a professor for grades. I believe, if I recall 
correctly, I think it was the grades for his 
girlfriend, not his own grades. But he was 
shouting, and he was a big kind of imposing 
guy, and so there was a disciplinary procedure 
at that time, and I’m sure there still is, through 
a student court and then any final decision 
can be appealed to the Board of Regents. 

Well, the student court disciplined him 
in some fashion. I’ve forgotten exactly what, 
but I think it wasn’t severe, it wasn’t anything 
like he had to leave the campus or anything, 
but I think it was something to the effect that 
maybe his grade would be reduced or maybe 
he was suspended for awhile from the team, 
I’ve forgotten exactly what, but it was then 
appealed to the Board of Regents. 

This became quite a celebrated case among 
the black community in Reno, and when the 
board met, we had a very large audience who 
felt that perhaps he was being unfairly dealt 


with by virtue of the fact of his race. So we 
heard it and reviewed it. I was chairman at 
this time. Also, the Adamian thing was while 
I was chairman. Both of those two wore me 
out. I believe that the black community felt 
that we had treated him unfairly. I think we 
sustained some minor disciplinary thing. I 
think part of it was that he was so large and 
that the professor felt more intimated perhaps 
than he might have been if he were a smaller 
person. But anyway, some minor disciplinary 
action was sustained, and people seemed to be 
relatively happy with it. We also had a lot of 
those meetings like that with a large group.... 

One of the things that did occur out of 
that Adamian situation was that I certainly 
realized that we needed a revised disciplinary 
procedural code. The real problem was 
that the type of conduct that was expected 
of professors and students was not well 
defined and that really led to all of the legal 
problems. Actually, I drafted a new code, and 
it eventually was adopted by the board. It 
made a lot clearer the kind of activities that 
were acceptable and not acceptable. 

That’s good. 

And some revised procedures applied that 
didn’t take so long and get everyone so upset. 

Well, it’s nice to know some good came out of 
all this aggravation. So, your appointment as 
university attorney was simultaneous with 
being the deputy attorney general? 

Yes. 



7 

Nevada Telephone Company 


I recall, in looking at my notes here, that part 
of this period you also served as vice president 
of the Nevada Telephone Company. 

Yes. 

Can you tell us a little bit about that experience ? 

Sure. That was a fascinating experience. 
This little telephone company served central 
Nevada, and it was started at the time of the 
big mining boom in Tonopah and Goldfield. 
And at that time, Tonopah and Goldfield was 
the population center of the state. The phone 
company was formed by people who were, at 
that time, leaders of the community and the 
state. There were two persons who became 
United States Senators, one a governor, one 
a member of the House of Representatives, 
and another became the financial magnet 
of the state, George Wingfield, who owned 
most of the banks at that time. So it was a 
pretty prestigious group, a very able group, 
that formed this company to serve the 
telephone needs. Telephones were reasonably 


new, and so they served Tonopah, Goldfield, 
Manhattan, Bullfrog, Rhyolite, and a lot of 
these little communities that were building 
up were boomtowns. One of the communities 
that was designated in the original service 
authorization from the state was, in addition 
to the large towns of Tonopah and Goldfield, 
was the town of Reno, but nobody paid much 
attention to that at the time, [laughter] 

Then, the way I became involved, was my 
grandfather worked as a bookkeeper at that 
firm, and over the years he bought stock in 
it. In those boomtown areas, things would 
go up and down very swiftly, you know, 
and there would be a gold mine discovered, 
and then it would be mined out, and then 
something else would happen, and so forth, 
but he had confidence in it. He gradually 
bought the majority control of the stock. 
This was after a lot of the original founders 
had left, and were not so interested in the 
telephone company. Senator Pittman went 
on to the Senate, [Tasker] Oddie became the 
governor, and later a senator and, of course, 
it was a minor thing to George Wingfield. 



52 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


They were just wanting to get the telephone 
company going. The Nevada Telephone and 
Telegraph Company was formed in 1905, 
and I think he bought or had the majority of 
the stock probably in about 1915, if I recall 
correctly; and it did well for awhile and then 
the area came on very hard times, and the 
company kind of wound down to a very small 
operation, a few phones. Then, World War II 
came along, and all of a sudden, they put a 
big airbase down there. 

So, in the meantime, my grandfather 
had moved to Reno with my grandmother, 
who was also an officer of the company, 
then and later on for a number of years. 
Actually, she took quite an interest in it 
during all the twenties, thirties and forties. 
She was president. But anyway, it was a small 
operation, and the local people were kind 
of running it and my grandfather would go 
down periodically to see how everything was 
going. Then, when this airbase came, things 
boomed up, so they moved back to live in 
Tonopah during the war. But when the war 
ended, in true Tonopah style, most everybody 
left, and places folded up, Tonopah was back 
on hard times again. Goldfield was very 
small. 

At the time that I graduated from law 
school in 1958, my grandmother wanted 
to sell the stock, and somebody had said 
they would buy it for ten thousand. I said, 
“Geez, I don’t think you want to sell it.” She 
said, “Well, there’s nobody here to run it or 
take an interest in it.” Of course, my father 
was the superintendent of the schools here, 
he didn’t have the time, and I thought, this 
is a neat thing. Sure, well, let’s see about it. 
About that time, somebody came by from an 
organization called Kellogg Switchboard and 
Supply Later it was absorbed by IT&T, but it 
provided telephone equipment to telephone 
companies. 


It turned out that the government wanted 
to locate a radar station as part of what they 
called the “sage system,” a semiautomatic 
ground control system. It was a series of radar 
stations throughout the whole country, and it 
was designed to be able to cover with radar 
any incoming planes, because at that time 
that was the threat not missiles. And there 
was one going to be located in the Tonopah 
area. Well, the local manager, Edith Van 
Alstine, said there is no way they could build 
a telephone building on a mountain and 
furnish the very complex communications 
equipment for that radar site, and so they 
tentatively had turned it back over to Bell. 
This happened right about that time and this 
fellow from Kellogg Switchboard and Supply 
came through and said, “You people are nuts. 
This is a great thing to have. It will rehabilitate 
your own phone company, and we’ll help you, 
and we’ll help you finance it, we’ll help train 
your people. This is wonderful.” I talked to 
my grandmother. She was enthused to have 
somebody do something with the company, 
because it had been a big part of their lives. 
And so I said, “Yes, sure, let’s look into it.” 

So, very shortly after I got out of law 
school, this fellow from Kellogg Switchboard 
and Supply said, “We’ll fly you back to 
Chicago, you and your wife, red carpet on 
United Airlines.” They had a red carpet service, 
and actually rolled out a red carpet. And we 
thought this was a neat thing anyway, because 
for one thing, we were very broke, and it was 
wonderful to be able to go back to Chicago, 
and they were going to pay our way on the 
plane. We went back and, of course, they 
were willing to finance. We had to raise some 
additional capital. They would finance. It was 
a large loan at that time, it was five hundred 
thousand dollars, and then they would train 
our people, because our people were five little 
old lady operators and a seventy-two year old 



Nevada Telephone Company 


53 


maintenance man that climbed the poles to fix 
the wires, [laughter] So we went back, and got 
all enthused. The big worry that Barbara and 
I had, I remember, was we weren’t sure they 
had agreed to pay the hotel bill. They put us up 
at the Palace Hotel and it looked like a pretty 
expensive hotel. They were bringing in these 
silver platters to serve us, and we thought, if 
they haven’t agreed to pay for the hotel bill, 
we’re in big trouble, [laughter] But they did. 
They picked it up. I was happy about that. 

So, we embarked on this project and did 
borrow the money and did hire Kellogg to 
install all the communications equipment, 
built a big building up on a mountain. It was 
about five hundred thousand dollars worth 
of telephone equipment to service this radar 
site, and we had a ten-year contract with the 
government to provide this service. It could 
be terminated in less than that time, but 
they would pay for the unused depreciation 
of the building. We hired two people we 
had known from Hawthorne, Nevada, to be 
trained. Both of them were firemen, and we 
got two high school students from Tonopah, 
and trained them and that became our 
maintenance force, and they did a very good 
job. One of the persons who was a fireman, 
Howard Smith, later became general manager 
down there, and so we had this contract 
with the government that was helping to 
really rehabilitate the phone system. At that 
time, there were still only old crank phones 
throughout the community. 

Oh really? 

Yes. We had two hundred fifty of them, as 
I recall. We had fifty phones in Goldfield, and 
I think two in Manhattan, [laughter] Rhyolite 
and Bullfrog had long disappeared, [laughter] 
But anyway, we got going on that, and a few 
years later, we were able to, I think two years 


later, get an REA loan, because we now had a 
kind of a solid base, to be able to convert our 
crank phones to dial, and we did. 

And REA, excuse me for interrupting, but REA 
stands for? 

Rural Electrification Administration, but 
it also finances phones. For rural areas you 
have to particularly qualify, and there are 
two percent loans that help to subsidize rural 
phone service. In fact, REA did a wonderful 
subsidization throughout the whole United 
States over the years with both power and 
telephones with these loans to do so. So that 
enabled us to do that. It was kind of a joint 
effort. Barbara was very much involved. She 
was on the board of directors, my grandmother 
was on the board of directors, and my father 
and I, and so it was really fun. My father was 
made president, and my grandmother was the 
secretary. Barbara and I were on the board; 
I was vice president. It actually was quite a 
lot of work, because we had to put all these 
contracts and things together, and there were 
a lot of things happening. One of the things 
that happened was that after about eight years, 
all of a sudden on Good Friday, we got a call 
that said, “By the way, we’re terminating the 
government contract”, which they had a right 
to do, “on Monday.” So this cut the income of 
the company in half just within three days. 

Oh my. 

And that caused some rigorous 
readjustments. But then we were able to 
engage in a cost-settlement arrangement with 
Bell Telephone Company. It was in a way that 
assisted rural communities that had to provide 
essentially the same kind of equipment as a 
large company to be on the toll network. They 
had a cost-settlement program, whereby Bell 



54 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


would subsidize a rural telephone company’s 
costs for toll service for what they actually 
were, but then Bell got the toll revenue that 
was generated. That worked very well. That 
was a great impetus in a lot of ways, like the 
REA in providing the same kind of phone 
service in rural communities that large cities 
had. That was a wonderful program, and it 
worked very well and it was a salvation to our 
company after the government terminated 
the contract. When I went on the bench in 
1977, I could no longer be a vice president 
and director and so my wife, Barbara, took 
over as vice president and took an active 
role in managing the company. She did an 
excellent job. My son, Procter IV, became 
quite involved in the company and was very 
helpful with legal matters. 

Is the family still involved in the telephone 
company? 

No, we sold it about six years ago. It was 
kind of hard to do because it had been in 
the family for over seventy years, but things 
were changing so much in the industry. 
We would have kept it actually, if things 
had stayed somewhat the same. But with 
the competition from MCI and Sprint, and 
AT&T breaking up and no longer willing 
to be part of this cost settlement, sharing of 
costs program, where the other companies 
were not. That was going to create, we 
thought, some real financial strain. Right 
now it would be very hard for a small 
company such as ours to be competing with 
what is now the new telephone system. I am 
very pleased we sold, except for the fact that 
it was an awful lot of fun. 

I see. Well, it’s certainly a piece of your family 
history, but it seems to me it’s kind of an 
interesting piece of Nevada history as well. 


It is really. The minute book of the company 
of stockholders and board of directors is just 
fascinating to see the characters who were 
involved and what they did, knowing what 
they later became. One of the things we did 
was to trace down all of the old stockholders, 
because they had kind of gotten lost. A lot of 
them had gotten lost, because the company 
wasn’t in essence worth anything. But 
we found some of them. They were very 
interesting people. One person who took us 
a long time to find was a mining engineer. He 
had become the president of International 
Mining Association somewhere in the past. 

That’s interesting. So what became of those early 
minute books? 

Well, we had to turn them over to the 
buyers of the company, but I kept copies of it 
all. 

Oh good. Good. 

And now they have lost the original 
books, and I’m sorry that they made us turn 
them over. 

Oh, that’s a shame. I think the state historical 
society would be very interested in that 
material. That’s too bad. 

Well, they may find them yet, some 
time yet, but they’re in some warehouse 
somewhere. 

Was it a big concern when they took over the 
company? 

It was. It was. And then they merged, 
in turn, with another company, and the 
one that is now in is Altel, which is a large 
independent. 



8 


Woodburn, Forman, Wedge, 
Blakey, Folsom & Hug 


After the firm you were in, McKissick and 
Springer, broke up, you then went to work for 
another firm. Is that right? 

Yes. Woodburn, Forman, Wedge, Blakey 
and Folsom. When they had contacted me, I 
said, “I’d be happy to join, but I want my name 
on the firm.” Because I’d been with Springer, 
McKissick & Hug and I didn’t want to get too 
lost. So they were a little bit concerned about 
that because it made a lot of names. And I said, 
“Well, it’s a very short name.” So it became 
Woodburn, Forman, Wedge, Blakey, Folsom 
&Hug. 

How did you come to be associated with these 
people? 

Well, Virgil Wedge came to talk to me, and 
asked if I would like to join up with their firm, 
and he asked me at a time that I was going 
crazy trying, with Roger Newton, to manage 
the practice that we had, which was a very busy 
practice at that time. It seemed rather appealing 
to me. McKissick was gone, and Springer went 


to the attorney general’s office. I think at that 
time I said I would join their firm after Springer 
had finished being attorney general, so that I 
wouldn’t just abandon ship. So when he left 
the attorney general’s office, he came back to 
practice with Roger Newton. I left to join the 
Woodburn firm. I’m not sure why they were 
interested in me. I had tried cases against one 
of their partners, Gordon Thompson, and I 
tried cases that Dick Blakey was involved in. 
Maybe they thought that I did all right. 

Must have liked your style. And I guess you’d 
had some dealings with Mr. Woodburn, right? 

[laughter] That’s right, and with Virgil 
Wedge, with democratic politics. But that was 
never mentioned, [laughter] 

[laughter] They never brought that up? 

I certainly wasn’t going to bring it up. 

[laughter] Now when you were in practice 
with the other firm you were doing criminal 



56 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


defense, and you were doing some personal 
injury, handling divorce cases. What sorts of 
cases did you have with this new firm? 

Well, it was, again, quite a general 
practice. I think I still did some criminal 
defense because we were required to take 
appointments from the federal court. So, I still 
did some of that for maybe the next couple 
of years and, but I did general business law, 
utility law, because I was involved with the 
phone company, and some other utility law, 
and represented some insurance defense and 
also some plaintiffs’ work. I tried a couple of 
cases, representing the Southern Pacific on 
crossing accidents. They were hard clients 
to represent, because they didn’t want to put 
those gates on some of the intersections, so 
when the crash would occur the suit was 
against the Southern Pacific for not having 
gates and relying on the whistle on the 
engines. Tough cases. I had one interesting 
case that involved the Carson Irrigation 
District and the Southern Pacific and an 
engineer on the Southern Pacific who brought 
an FELA case. What had happened is the 
base of the tracks had gotten flooded out, and 
when the engine hit it, it overturned. Ralph 
Baber, who was the engineer, was injured and 
so he brought this case, FELA is somewhat 
like Workmen’s Compensation litigation. But 
what was fascinating was that it involved the 
Carson Irrigation District as an additional 
defendant. 

Was it their water? 

It was their water. And it was their ditch 
and that’s what we were litigating for was 
whether it was their fault. They let their ditch 
overflow, let too much water out and it ate 
away at the base. We also had a countersuit 
against the Carson Irrigation District for the 


damage to the locomotive. We tried that case, 
and it was really an interesting case. We won 
the case, and the Carson Irrigation District 
was held liable both for the engineer’s injuries 
and for the damage to the locomotive. 

That must have hurt them. Were there large 
damages assessed? 

Yes, there were. Those kinds of damages 
weren’t as huge as now. At that time, they 
were large. 

Must have been more money than Mr. Caldwell 
was involved in, right? Mr. Caldwell, that was 
a lawsuit of about fifty-three thousand. 

Yes, right. I suspect so. I’ve kind of 
forgotten what the amount was. I think Ralph 
Baber got about twenty-five thousand dollars. 
I forget what the damages to the locomotive 
were. 

I recall earlier you were telling us about some 
of the judges that you appeared before and you 
mentioned a Judge Gabrielli. Am I pronouncing 
that correctly? 

Yes. Gabrielli. 

Gabrielli. Would this be a good time to ask you 
about a case you argued before him? 

Sure. That really was a fascinating case. 

Why don t you continue, Judge. 

Well, the case I’m thinking of was the 
administration of the estate of Lavere Redfield. 
Lavere Redfield was a noted character from 
this area, in that he was very wealthy, but you 
would never know it from the attire he wore 
or the manner in which he conducted his 



Woodburn, Forman, Wedge, Blakey, Folsom & Hug 


57 


business. He would appear at execution sales, 
bankruptcy sales, foreclosures of mortgage. 
He would carry along a little brown paper 
sack. That sack was always full of cash. 

So, he bought a whole lot of things at these 
execution sales. He had made his money by 
selling his stock just before the 1929 crash 
and buying a lot of real estate. He was almost 
kind of a Silas Marner character. He was really 
a miser, except for the fact that he liked to 
gamble, and he did gamble. Hed gamble ten 
thousand dollars at a time. I remember one 
time my son and I were building a playhouse 
for my daughters, and it was a holiday, and we 
needed some more wood, so the only lumber 
yard that was open on a holiday was one that 
was owned by Redfield. We went out, we got 
the plywood, and this little old man came 
out to help us load it on the truck with his 
coveralls and everything, and I told my son, 
“You wouldn’t believe that’s the richest man 
in town, would you.” [laughter] And it was. 
It was Lavere Redfield. He was there running 
his lumber company. He had a stone house 
on the corner of Mount Rose and Plumas. It 
was a two story duplex and the bottom story 
was just like the top story. 

It was always kind of a formidable looking 
house, sort of a fortress-looking house. We 
later learned that the bathrooms on the lower 
level quit working so he and his wife, both in 
their seventies, would go up to the second 
floor to use the bathroom. Nobody else lived 
in the duplex. The bathrooms never got fixed. 
It cost too much money to get a plumber. He 
was a fascinating person in a lot of respects. 
He owned about fifty thousand acres of land 
on the Reno side of the Sierras, going clear 
over to Verdi. It was kind of up to the top 
of those mountains before you went over to 
Lake Tahoe. He had bought these acres way 
back when, in those days after 1929, he paid 
something like a dollar an acre. It is beautiful 


mountain land. It was sort of checkerboard 
within sections of the National Forest. 

Another principal asset of his was stored 
away in his basement. He had four hundred 
thousand mint-condition silver dollars 
hidden in his basement that he had bought 
from the mints. He had built a false wall up 
out of boxes of fake coins that he had bought. 
I think it was a Shell Oil program, Coins of 
the Confederacy or something. Anyway, there 
were boxes. He bought up all the rest of them 
after their promotion was up, and he used 
these boxes and stacked them one on top 
of the other with just a little hole at the top. 
And he’d climb up, go through that hole, and 
climb down the other side. He had a counting 
machine over there, and he’d keep track of 
these silver dollars. He also had a kind of a 
unique burglar alarm system. He had set a 
bunch of Coke bottles along the stairs so that 
if anyone came down in the dark, he would 
hear all this crashing of bottles. He had been 
robbed one time of another collection of silver 
dollars, and he made sure it wasn’t going to 
happen again. 

When the estate was to be probated, there 
was a lot of other property around town, 
and some bank accounts, in addition to the 
fifty thousand acres of land and these four 
hundred thousand silver dollars. I guess his 
total estate, as I recall, was something like 
eighty million. He had left a little page-and- 
a-half will, handwritten, in which he had 
designated his wife and two other women to 
be the executors of his estate. Then the next 
bizarre thing that happened was there were 
several other wills, only one of which was 
significant, that turned up, supposedly written 
in his handwriting too, but they were able to 
establish that they were forgeries. However, 
that held things up for probably two or three 
months until we got that established. It’s kind 
of like the Howard Hughes’ wills, which were 



58 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


fascinating too. I went down and was involved 
in that. Ask me about that later. 

I will. 

In Redfield’s case, there was really one 
principal forged will that was submitted, and 
it had named different executors and so forth 
but anyway we established that was a forgery. 
The genuine will created three ladies to be 
executors of his estate. Each hired an attorney. 
I represented Candid Larena, who was one of 
them, Luanna Miles was another person, and 
then the third was Nell Redfield, his wife. That 
created somewhat of a problem, in that, we all 
had to get along. It started out, the attorney 
for Nell Redfield was not very pleased to have 
two other executrixes involved. It kind of 
muddied the water, and so we kind of started 
out fairly antagonistic to each other. Redfield 
left one-half to his wife and one-half to a niece 
in Idaho. An attorney was also appointed to 
represent the niece, so now there were four 
of us to all get along. And Jerry Smith, who 
became Nell Redfield’s attorney, had engaged 
a man by the name of Ken Walker, who was 
at Merchants Bank in Southern California, to 
assist with some of the financial matters. So, 
what we finally did was establish a periodic 
meeting. I served as chairman, and, as I recall, 
we met once a month. It was almost like a 
board of directors’ meeting. It would last all 
day, and we would decide what we were going 
to do with the estate. Finally, we all decided 
we were going to have to get along together. 
We did, and we administered the estate. 

Judge Gabrielli, who you were first asking 
about, was the judge who was responsible for 
this, it was in his court that the administration 
took place, and he did a wonderful job. I 
think he contributed to us getting along. The 
incident I am particularly thinking of that he 
did so well in was, at the time we were going to 


sell the four hundred thousand silver dollars 
Redfield had stored in his basement, because 
cash was needed. We had estate taxes to pay 
for, plus the fact, Mrs. Redfield didn’t want to 
keep the silver dollars, nor did the niece, so 
we decided to sell them. Well, if we just put it 
out in a normal way, advertising for sale, a lot 
of the value of the coins could well disappear, 
because a lot of them had numismatic value, 
not just the value of the silver. If it wasn’t 
handled in the correct way, it was going to 
greatly diminish the value of these coins, so 
one approach that Mrs. Redfield’s attorney 
was very much in favor of, was to get an 
appraiser to come in from New York, a well- 
known reputable person who would appraise 
the coins, then we would know their value 
and maybe could deal with one person. This 
was one approach, I didn’t agree with it, but 
one approach was if we know what the value 
is, then if a purchaser was willing to agree to 
buy them for the appraised value, then we’d 
know that we got a good price. One bidder 
bid the appraised price of $1,500,000. Well, we 
went over to the court and that was argued. 
A couple of us argued that we didn’t think 
that was a very good way to just deal with 
one buyer, however, that was approved by the 
court. 

Then lo and behold, another buyer said 
that sight unseen, he’d be willing to bid a half 
a million dollars more than the price. It had 
been approved already, but here’s this person 
who’s willing to pay another one-half million 
dollars sight unseen. Nobody had seen the 
coins except the appraiser, by the way. Well, 
we put them in a bank vault downstairs. I 
went down to look at them, because I just 
wanted to see what four hundred thousand 
coins looked like. Then we went back to court. 
What are we going to do now? Judge Gabrielli 
said wisely, “We’re going to open it up for 
bidding in court.” And so then a third bidder 



Woodburn, Forman, Wedge, Blakey, Folsom & Hug 


59 


came in, and this was really getting interesting 
because originally they had been appraised for 
a million and a half, and so we had another 
half million dollars offered. It was the oddest 
bidding I’ve ever seen take place. “We’ll now 
open it for bidding,” Judge Gabrielli said. “I 
bid two million.” Another one said, “I’ll give 
you two million one hundred thousand.” And 
it went up a hundred thousand dollars a pop 
to four and a half million dollars. 

Wow. 

Yes. And the other buyer ran out of money 
at the crucial time and couldn’t bid any more 
so the original buyer bought it for four and 
a half million. But now he was very upset 
because he already previously had them for 
one and a half million. He said, “This is a 
breach of contract. I’m willing to bid this, but 
I want to preserve my position to argue the 
million and a half.” Judge Gabrielli said, “Well, 
I’m not going to take a conditional bid. It’s 
either you’re bidding four and a half million 
or you’re not. Otherwise, we’ll sell it to the one 
who bid four million four hundred thousand 
dollars.” And so he asked them to go out, and 
they came back and decided it would be an 
unconditional bid. [laughter] I thought that 
was a very shrewd move on the part of Judge 
Gabrielli that he smoked that one out and in 
his very kindly, soft way, just wasn’t going to 
put up with that. So those coins were sold for, 
ultimately, for four and a half million. 

Another really fascinating thing, and there 
were many of them in this estate, was what do 
we do about the fifty thousand acres of land? 
We’ve got estate taxes to pay, four and a half 
million dollars is not enough. And how do 
we liquidate the land? I mean, open it up for 
a developer or whatever? Much of the land 
owned was every other section in the Toiyabe 
National Forest. The Forest Service was very 


anxious to acquire it to preserve the nature of 
the forest. 

Bill Woodburn and I went back to talk to 
[U.S. Senator] Howard Cannon. I had written 
a memorandum where I thought that the 
Internal Revenue Service could agree that they 
would exchange the estate tax for an equivalent 
amount of land that would be turned over to 
the Forest Service that wanted the land very 
badly. And I thought it could be done. When 
we went back to the Internal Revenue Service, 
they got real nervous about it. I still think it 
could have been done that way, but they got 
very nervous about it, because this didn’t go 
through the appropriation procedure, but we 
then embarked on a different approach to get 
a special statute passed through Congress to 
permit this, because it makes just eminent 
good sense. It would be a shame to turn all 
of this beautiful mountain forest land over to 
just be developed and carved up. If it became 
part of the National Forest, wouldn’t everyone 
win? Senator Cannon was convinced that 
was a wonderful idea. So, he got a little 
short attachment to an appropriations bill 
that authorized the transfer to the Forest 
Service, at the appraised value of the land, 
such amount of the land as required to 
pay the estate taxes. That’s what happened, 
and so really about ten thousand acres was 
transferred to the Forest Service. It became a 
part of the National Forest and preserved for 
future generations, so we were happy about 
that. 

Are there other unusual aspects of this estate? 
I mean this is a very complicated probate, 
obviously, and a very unusual one, too. 

Well, one of the complications that 
happened is that the appraiser who had 
been employed, then maintained that he had 
been deprived the opportunity to bid on the 



60 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


coins. We said, “That’s ridiculous. You’re an 
appraiser you shouldn’t be able to be bidding 
on what you’re appraising.” So he ended up 
filing a suit against Jerry Smith, who had been 
dealing with him. A very unfair suit, because 
he obviously had not made a commitment 
along that line, but it certainly made me think 
less of the appraiser. We took depositions of 
other people in that firm. It ended up they 
didn’t prevail. 

Then, there was another interesting thing; 
Redfield had had a stroke. He had been a 
person who would never sign an agreement or 
anything for anybody You had to deal almost 
always orally with him, and he was very 
reluctant to ever sign anything. Well, someone 
had gone in, shortly before he died, and was 
in a weakened condition, had gotten him to 
sign a lease for a very cheap amount. It was 
for six thousand acres next to the ski resort 
on Mount Rose and Slide Mountain and was 
valuable land, and the lease provided that he 
turned this over in exchange for the revenue 
that would be derived from the ski lifts. Well, 
ski resorts don’t make a lot of their money 
from the lifts themselves. They make it on the 
restaurants and shops, plus the fact that there 
was no guarantee that they were going to build 
it, so this land was, in essence, turned over for 
a very unfair amount, which was very unlike 
Redfield. He was a very shrewd businessman. 

So, then we filed suit, and I tried it. That 
was the last case I tried before I went on the 
bench. We filed suit to set this lease aside for 
undue influence, and that was fascinating. It 
was about a one-page lease. It had been, in 
turn, sold to the operator of Slide Mountain 
Ski Resort. This sale took place with a 
hundred-page documentation, and so I had 
some fun with that in trying this case. The 
attorney, Mr. Gunn, who had operated Slide 
Mountain, was a prime witness, and I had 
some fun cross-examining him about his 


hundred-page document, but he was sure this 
one-page lease from Redfield was okay. It was 
a jury trial; the jury came back with a verdict 
for the Redfield Estate. The lease involved a six 
thousand acre area site. It was actually worth 
about six million dollars. 

I understand you were also involved in another 
probate involving the Howard Hughes Estate. 
Can you tell us about that? 

That’s right. Howard Hughes left his 
estate in kind of a quandary, in that there 
were a great many wills that began appearing. 
The most famous one that was handwritten 
and a movie made about it was the Melvin 
Dummar will. Supposedly, Melvin Dummar 
had picked up Howard Hughes when he was 
on the highway, and had given him a ride, 
and Howard Hughes was so grateful that 
he named him in his will. And this will left 
the estate, which was, of course, exceedingly 
large, probably it was over a billion dollars. It 
left it in sixteenths to various organizations, 
and I think a sixteenth to Melvin, but then 
also to others. And one of the recipients was 
to be the University of Nevada, and that’s 
how I got involved, because I was at that 
time representing the university, and so I 
went down to confer with those who were 
seeking to uphold that will. It looked like it 
was a pretty good exemplar of his writing, 
and it seemed like there was some possible 
merit to it. It had been examined by one 
handwriting expert who said that it was 
indeed his signature. Then, others were being 
brought in because there were those who 
believed that other wills were his, and there 
were also those who believed that he had left 
no will. 

I went down then to speak to the persons 
who were in the clerk’s office, and had 
talked to the various experts that had come 



Woodburn, Forman, Wedge, Blakey, Folsom & Hug 


61 


through. Our group named in the Dummar 
will hired a number of noted handwriting 
experts. They said that it was pretty clearly 
not his signature, although it was a fairly good 
forgery. One of the interesting things, just in 
talking with some of the clerk’s people down 
there, was the relative technology used by the 
various handwriting experts. The one who 
had said that our will was valid, they said, 
“You know, he came in here a lot different 
than the others. The others came in with all 
this sophisticated equipment. He kind of 
came in with a magnifying glass and a bed 
lamp.” [laughter] Although there were others 
that pursued it further, after I had examined 
the statements of the three nationally known 
handwriting experts, all of whom said it was 
not his signature, I was unwilling to pursue 
it any further on behalf of the university. I 
certainly would have liked to have seen them 
get a sixteenth, but in good faith, there was 
no basis for going ahead with that. 

But it must have been interesting to be involved 
in it. 

It was. I think there were eventually 
about twenty different wills that showed up. 
All sorts of people were wanting to try to 
establish a valid will. 

It must have been difficult being on the bench 
and hearing these cases, hearing these different 
wills presented. 

Yes. I think the courts really had to do 
some searching. Eventually, no will was 
upheld, and it was therefore distributed on 
the basis of intestate succession. 

Id forgotten that was the final disposition in 
that. You told us about a number of different 
cases that you’ve handled in private practice, 


including the Redfield Estate, Benny the Booster 
[laughter], any others you’d like to tell us about ? 

Well, let’s see. One I know that was kind 
of amusing in a way. This was one I handled 
early in practice, and it was at the time they 
were going to hold the Winter Olympics at 
Squaw Valley, which is quite close to Reno, 
and Reno would be the city that would be 
hosting most of the visitors at least. The 
chamber of commerce was very anxious to 
erect a building that would be kind of the 
center for tickets and all that sort of thing and 
would be a chalet type of a structure. It was 
drawn up beautifully by the architects and the 
chamber of commerce. They wanted to put it 
in Powning Park, which is a plaza that had 
been dedicated many years before—probably 
fifty or sixty years before—to the city as a 
plaza. It was a fairly small park, with grass 
and trees, and there was a lot of resistance 
from persons who did not want a building 
in this area, and filed suit to stop it. But the 
Chamber of Commerce was very anxious to 
have it, and they employed me to defend the 
placement. It seemed to me it fit in very well 
with the site, and I thought it was a good 
idea, too. I believe some of the relatives of the 
original donor were involved, but there were 
others who were protesting that this was an 
improper use of this dedicated plaza. 

Eventually, we had a hearing in the district 
court, and the court upheld this particular 
use of a plaza. It was kind of interesting to 
determine that, when something is dedicated 
as a plaza, what goes into a plaza. That was 
the issue, and the court found that buildings 
can go into a plaza. It wasn’t dedicated as a 
park; it was a plaza. The case eventually went 
to our Nevada Supreme Court. I argued it, 
and the Nevada Supreme Court affirmed the 
district court. So, the structure that was shown 
quite beautifully on the drawing boards 



62 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


was erected. Unfortunately, it didn’t end up 
looking as beautiful as I had anticipated. 
For one thing, it had a very steep high roof 
with not an attractive roof covering. It wasn’t 
shakes, like I thought it would be. I was 
very disappointed in the way it looked, and 
I thought, geez, this is something that I’m 
partly responsible for. What was the irony of 
it all was that the Springer, McKissick & Hug 
law office, was in the building right across the 
street, and we just left the office where we were 
on the third floor and moved to the first floor. 
My window on the first floor of that building 
looked right out at this ugly roof, [laughter] 
Our firm was feeling kind of bad about the 
whole thing, and we volunteered to pay for a 
different roof covering for that building, but 
they wouldn’t take us up on it. They wanted 
to leave it the way it was. But that was maybe 
just desserts for me. [laughter] 

What a story. Well, you had an interesting 
career handling lots of different types of cases 
as a private lawyer. 



9 


American Bar Association 


One of the things that I was very heavily 
involved in was the American Bar Association. 

Oh, I’d like to know about that. 

I ran for the state delegate to the American 
Bar Association. Each state has one delegate 
to the House of Delegates, and then they 
also have other representatives of various 
bar associations that sit in the House of 
Delegates. And Nevada then had a state bar 
delegate as well. The advantage of being a 
state delegate was that the fifty state delegates 
nominated the officers of the American Bar 
Association, so it’s a fairly powerful spot. I ran 
in a statewide bar election, and I was elected. 
One of the funny things about that, as I think 
about it, was that, at that time, the House of 
Delegates was made up of older people. They 
were pretty conservative, and there weren’t 
many people that were, say, under fifty or 
sixty. 

About when was this? What year? 


I have to think back. It was about 1972, I’d 
say. I went back, and I was dressed in western 
attire with a sport coat, as I recall, it was kind 
of a green plaid sport coat, and I went into this 
sea of blue, grey, and black suits, and I stood 
out like a beacon in that house, I remember 
thinking, “there’s this crazy westerner.” But 
since that time, and during the time I was 
there, there was a lot of emphasis on getting 
younger people in, and the dress code changed 
considerably. But, I sure remember sitting 
there that first day thinking I am really out 
of place, [laughter] Barbara went with me to 
the meetings, and she toned down my attire. 
I was, later, elected to the Board of Governors 
of the American Bar Association, and I served 
there for two years. Actually, I was serving in 
that capacity, when I was appointed to go on 
the bench, and I think I finished out that year. 
Barbara and I both enjoyed the time with the 
Board of Governors. I left the bar position, I 
think, a little bit early in the final year, because 
I was finding, they were meeting as a board at 
that time, once a month for three days and it 



64 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


was too much with my judicial work. They’ve 
since cut that down, but they had way too 
many meetings at that time. 

That’s a tremendous responsibility. 

Yes, it really was too much. 

And what was the function of the Board of 
Governors? 

Board of Governors is the policymaking 
body of the American Bar Association—it 
sort of functions like a cabinet. It employs 
the executive personnel, does the hiring and 
firing, sets up the agenda for the House of 
Delegates. The House of Delegates is like the 
legislative body, in effect, and so the board 
handles really the affairs of the American 
Bar Association in between the two annual 
meetings of the House of Delegates. 

Do you recall any significant issues that came 
before the House of Delegates while you served 
or before the Board of Governors? 

One I can think of right away was lawyer 
advertising. 

Oh, that’s an important issue. 

Yes. 

There still seems to be controversy. 

That’s true, and the American Bar 
Association actually opposed that, but 
the Supreme Court in a case held that bar 
associations could not prevent advertising. 
Interestingly, one of the judges on our circuit, 
when he was an attorney, argued that case 
before the Supreme Court and won. 


Who was that? 

Judge Bill Canby. 

Oh really? Down in Phoenix. 

Yes. We were opposed, because we were 
thinking that it was not professional, and that 
it would lead to the used car kind of approach 
to law practice, and that there would be too 
much possibility of misleading the public. The 
argument on the other side, of course, is that 
it would open up the services to the general 
public on a more competitive basis, and that 
ultimately it would result in lower fees and 
better opportunities to choose lawyers. I 
don’t know if that’s really transpired or not, 
but I think the used car approach to lawyer 
advertising has come true, unfortunately. 

Well, after twenty years or more, thereabouts 
anyway, of lawyer advertising, how do you feel 
about it now? 

I think we were right the first time, when 
we thought that it did not lead to appropriate 
professionalism. There are arguments on the 
other side, but that’s certainly my view. 

Any other significant issues that you recall from 
this time? 

One of things that we were trying very 
hard, in fact, I was on the committee to 
do so, was to bring younger people into 
the policymaking area of the ABA, such as 
through the committee structure and through 
the various sections of the ABA, to have it 
open to younger people. We were actively 
encouraging the young lawyers section and 
having a representative from the young 
lawyers section on our Board of Governors. 



American Bar Association 


65 


I’m trying to think of other issues at that time, 
and there were a couple of them. Each year 
there would be two or three controversial 
issues, and I might have to look back to 
remember. Offhand, that’s the one I think of. I 
know during that time, we hosted judges from 
England at the 1776 bicentennial celebration, 
and that was quite successful, I thought. It 
turned out to be quite expensive. The bar 
association was having financial troubles for 
the next couple of years as a result, because a 
little too much was spent on entertaining the 
English judges. 

Were there many women involved in the ABA 
at that time? 

Initially, not many. And that was another 
thing that was beginning to open up too. 
There were very few women when I was 
first in the House of Delegates, and that has 
opened up a lot. 

How about in practice here in Nevada while 
you were in private practice? Were there many 
women lawyers? 

No, there were not. There were maybe four 
or five, if that many. Three or four, maybe. 

Has that changed over time? 

That has changed. That has changed 
considerably. When I was in law school there 
were only three women in my law school class. 
Now it’s about fifty-fifty, and there are a lot of 
women now in practice, and that’s been a very 
good thing. I think that women have done a 
good job. The old idea was that, well, a woman 
couldn’t appropriately try a case. I remember 
hearing that a lot, and it just wasn’t true. There 
are very capable women lawyers, both in trial 


and in appellate practice that I see. They do 
very well. 

Well, learning a lot about your career, one of 
the things that strikes me is you seem to have 
been and maybe continue to be, an agent for 
change. Do you see yourself that way? 

Yes, I do. I do. I think I have been an agent 
for change. 

Do you think that is reflected in your work on 
the bench? 

Yes, although, you know, on the bench 
you don’t have as much of an opportunity 
to really change things policy-wise. You can 
change things in a way the court operates. 
For example, I was on the gender-bias task 
force that we had, and I thought that was a 
very good thing for us to take a look at how 
we, as judges and lawyers, were operating 
and whether unintentionally there was 
some bias against women. Indeed, it was 
shown that there was. There were just little 
things that would put a woman lawyer at a 
disadvantage that very well meaning judges 
and fellow attorneys would not be aware of. 
“Sure nice to see you here, honey. That’s a 
beautiful dress.” That would be the kind of 
thing that a judge would think, well, that 
would be very complimentary. But, in effect, 
it put the woman lawyer at a rather serious 
disadvantage, in that she was something less 
than her opponent. 




10 


The U.S. Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit 


Let’s shift gears a little hit here, and let me ask 
you again about how you came to be appointed 
to the Court of Appeals. 

President Jimmy Carter had a different 
method of selecting appellate court judges. He 
did not want to have it done solely on the basis 
of recommendation of the senators involved, 
and so he established a commission in each 
of the circuits. In our circuit, it was an eleven- 
person commission I suspect that was probably 
true in the other ones too. The idea was for 
the commission to accept applications, and, in 
fact, I guess to promote applications and then 
to recommend to the president through the 
attorney general three to five persons that the 
commission felt would be good representatives 
on the court. That was done here. There were 
a number of persons who applied, and the 
commission held separate interviews with each 
of those persons who applied. 

An interesting part about it, for me at 
least, was that the commission asked Judge 
Bruce Thompson for recommendations. 
He recommended two attorneys. One was 


Rex Jameson in Las Vegas, and the other 
was me. He sent a brief letter that said he 
had recommended us. He didn’t say why or 
anything. I was quite flattered. I thought about 
it, and I thought, one, that I’d have to move to 
San Francisco, and that was not a very good 
situation at that time for my family, and, 
secondly, I also thought that the Chief Justice 
of the Nevada Supreme Court had it locked 
up, and that it was kind of hopeless and so 
I had decided not to apply. I wrote to Judge 
Thompson, thanking him very much, but that 
I thought that I would not apply. Rex Jameson 
called me and he said, “Are you going to apply?” 
I said, “No, I don’t think I will.” And I said, “Are 
you?” And he said, “Yes, I think I will.” And I 
said, “Don’t you think that the chief justice has 
it kind of locked up?” He said, “No. Well, you 
never can tell.” Later I did decide to apply. 

You thought the chief justice had it locked up? 
What did you mean by that? 

Well, I think he had planned ahead for 
a couple of years at least, and I think he 



68 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


had been in contact with Senator Cannon. 
He had kind of planned his life around the 
possibility of being able to do that. I thought 
that he would have a good strong inside 
track, because he thought about it a whole lot 
before and was the chief justice of the Nevada 
Supreme Court. 

And who was this at the time? 

A1 Gunderson. 

Al Gunderson. I see. And it was Judge 
Thompson, federal Judge Thompson, who 
recommended Rex Jameson and you? 

Yes. 

What happened next? 

Well then, they scheduled individual 
interviews with each one of us. They 
interviewed us all separately, and I don’t know 
exactly what happened in each interview. I do 
know what had happened that was adverse to 
Justice Gunderson. One of the members of the 
commission, one of the Nevada representatives, 
had, instead of simply getting letters of 
recommendation, thought the idea would be 
good to conduct a poll at the Nevada State Bar 
Convention, which was immediately before the 
interviews. It had distributed questionnaires to 
have the attorneys fill out what they thought 
about the judicial temperament and legal 
ability and so forth of all the various persons 
who had applied. Apparently, there was a lot 
of criticism of Justice Gunderson. Now, that’s 
what I have heard. So, that affected adversely 
his application to the commission, and the 
commission did not recommend him. They 
recommended Nevada Supreme Court Justice 
John Mowbray, an attorney here in Reno, Spike 
Wilson, and me. 


But initially you had been hesitant when you 
were recommended by Judge Thompson. 

Yes. 

What changed your mind? 

Well, that’s interesting. What started to 
change my mind was when Rex Jameson said 
he was going to apply, and I got to thinking 
about it, you know this is probably the one 
chance that I’d ever have. I didn’t know how 
good of a chance I had; I thought because I 
had not ever been a judge that was maybe 
going to be a problem, not realizing that a lot 
of people are appointed to the circuit courts 
and, indeed, to the Supreme Court, without 
ever having been a judge before. I thought 
that was a handicap, and then I just thought, 
well, if I’m ever going to have a chance, this 
is it. I had really always wanted to be a judge. 
Then right about that time, I got a call from 
Judge Eugene Wright on the Ninth Circuit 
Court of Appeals, who I had never really met. 
That was a great shock to me. But he had been 
involved with the National Judicial College 
and, apparently, knew people who did know 
me and said he really hoped I’d apply. He said 
he didn’t know if I knew, but that I did not 
have to move to San Francisco. And so that 
was a big item to me, so I decided to apply 
Now, the time was very short, and I had my 
secretary up until three in the morning typing 
out the application to get it off, and Federal 
Expressed it in time to get it in. [laughter] 

What transpired after the commission had 
these three recommendations? Then what 
happened? 

Well, Justice Gunderson, understandably, 
was extremely disappointed. He felt that it 
had been unfair to him, and I think that he, 



The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 


69 


working with others, had a local newspaper 
in the south attacking the manner in which 
the commission had operated. It was never 
really done in his name, but he was doing it 
and, truthfully, I can understand it, because 
he planned so hard on it. As a matter of fact, 
when I applied, I called him, and told him I 
was applying, and he was very nice about it, 
but I think he thought for sure he would be 
one of the three nominees. 

When you said, “the newspaper in the south” 
you meant the southern part of the state? 

Yes. It was called 7 he Valley Times, and 
they would publish articles and then they 
would be copied by all the other newspapers 
around the state and Reno and Las Vegas. 
The Valley Times stated that Spike Wilson had 
employed a public relations agent to get him 
well known with the commission, which was 
untrue. With regarded to Justice Mowbray, 
they were intimating that all his opinions were 
written by his clerks and had some articles 
about that. With regard to me, the attack was 
through “The Nevada Judges Association.” 
The Nevada Judges Association was really 
composed of the justices of the peace of the 
state, not all of the judges in the state. 

There are quite a few justices of the peace, right? 

Yes, there are. That’s right. At the end of 
their convention, I think it was in Ely or Elko, I 
forget which, when it came time for resolutions 
a lot of the justices had left when they passed 
a resolution that the commission should be 
redone, and no one should be appointed that 
didn’t have judicial experience. That of course, 
was aimed at me. I had a call from a lot of the 
justices of the peace around the state saying, 
“Well, we weren’t there. And we didn’t mean 
this.” Then it kind of all blew over. 


The U.S. Attorney General has a big 
influence on the selections, I think they 
make the recommendations in that office to 
the president. Anyway, what ever happened, 
I was selected, and they did an FBI check 
and so forth. When I had my confirmation 
hearing, there was no opposition at all, and 
it was a very nice ceremony. I had brought 
my whole family back to Washington, 
D.C.; my wife, father and mother, and all 
my kids, and we all went back, and they 
watched the hearing. The hearing before 
the subcommittee, with Senator [Howard] 
Cannon was wonderful. He took it right 
away to the full committee, got the full 
committee to act on this, and took it to the 
floor of the Senate, so that I went through 
the subcommittee, the committee, and the 
floor of the Senate, all on the same day, and 
my family was there to watch. It was really 
interesting for them. 

Oh that’s fabulous. 

Yes, it was. It was also arranged to have 
me sworn in the next morning at the White 
House, [laughter] 

Talk about a speedy process. That’s great. 
Who was the attorney general then? Was that 
Griffin Bell? 

Yes. 

And do you recall, was it Senator Cannon who 
chaired the hearing? 

He didn’t chair it, but he’s the one that 
took me before the committee, and gave a 
nice introductory talk, as did Paul Laxalt, 
who was then back there as a Senator. Both 
of them were very generous in their remarks, 
and it was a very easy hearing. 



70 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


It sailed right through. 

It sailed right through, so I was sworn 
in by Vice President Fritz Mondale, with 
my family watching. He invited all of us to 
go from his office, where I was sworn in, to 
have coffee in another room in the White 
House. He sat around, and talked with us 
for about half an hour. It always amazed me, 
when he was a candidate for president that 
he didn’t come across on TV better than he 
did, because he’s an extremely witty person. 
I mean he was a very entertaining person to 
talk to, and he was very congenial. One of the 
things I remember when we first went down 
there, he said, “Well, you’re on the court now. 
I bet they sure got some dog cases saved up 
for you.” [laughter] 

Well, I want to hear about some of those cases. 
But I’d like to know your evaluation of this 
process, the commission, of the hearing process 
and all that that went into your nomination 
and confirmation. 

Obviously, I thought it was a wonderful 
process. 

Couldn’t be better. 

No, I think the circuit commissions are 
a good process actually. I’m biased by it, of 
course, but I think it opens it up. It gives 
an opportunity for others, just than maybe 
one or two people who are put in charge 
of it, say, in the attorney general’s office to 
make the selections. It really opens it up so 
that recommendations come more from the 
community 

But that’s not the process that’s currently in 
place, is it? 


No, nobody else followed that afterward, 
just President Carter. 

Do you think the law should be changed to 
establish a permanent commission? 

Well, I don’t think it should be made a 
requirement of the law, but I think it would 
be a good practice for the president to follow 
for the court of appeals. I really do. And an 
awful lot of senators do that now, in making 
their recommendations for district judges. 
The recommendation of the senator is given 
a great deal of weight for district judges. It’s 
given a lot less weight for courts of appeals. 
The White House and the attorney general’s 
office have a lot bigger hand in the initial 
selection there. 

So you’re sworn in by the vice president with 
your family there at the White House. It’s very 
exciting. You come back to Nevada, and you 
get some dog cases. 

Well, one of the things that was kind of 
a surprise was when I was sworn in, I didn’t 
want to turn that opportunity down to be 
sworn in the White House. I had figured that 
I’d maybe have a few weeks or a month to 
wind up my practice, and turn things over to 
others in the firm, but now all of a sudden I 
was a judge the next day. It was a little bit of 
an imposition in the firm, in that, although I 
had been in the process of turning things over, 
but probably not as completely as I would have 
if I knew it was going to be the next day. 

When I came back, and, I thought, well, 
now that I’ve been appointed to this lofty 
position that they would be waiting there 
with the chambers and staff and furniture 
and everything all ready to take me in, and 
they weren’t ready at all. And they never are, 



The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 


71 


I find that’s the truth of the matter. That for 
a while you’re kind of having to sort of fend 
for yourself in getting yourself situated. There 
was a visitor’s courtroom adjacent to Bruce 
Thompson’s that was used by Judge [Roger] 
Foley when he came up to Reno. That’s where 
they put me, but it was not going to be any 
kind of a permanent headquarters, because 
it wasn’t really set up for it. So the General 
Services Administration came by, and said, 
“Well, we can arrange to have chambers 
built here in this federal building as soon as 
some of the agencies move out. The Internal 
Revenue Service is going to move out.” And 
I said, “Well, good. When is that?” “Well, we 
don’t really know. We’re trying to locate leased 
space for them. Unless you’d like to move 
to leased space.” I thought about that for a 
minute, and, I thought, you know, that’s the 
answer, because I could be waiting for years. 
So, they arranged for leased space in an office 
building downtown and that worked out very 
well. 

What building was that? 

It was the Ryland Building, which was on 
the corner of Center and Ryland. 

Not far from where we are now? 

Very close. Yes. 

So that first week or so on the job it was a 
matter of just getting organized? 

Yes, it was. It was, and because I was isolated 
here, well, I ought to tell you another thing. 
When I was in the process of determining 
where I was going to be, I always figured I 
was going to be in Reno. But I did have an 
interesting call from then Judge Anthony 


Kennedy, who had his chambers located in 
Sacramento, and he called to welcome me to 
the court, and also mentioned that I didn’t 
have to move to San Francisco. 

He said, “It’s just as well.” 

He said, “I’m here in Sacramento.” 

He said, “But, it’s just as well because if you’re 
around places like that people get to calling 
you ‘Your honor’ and everything, and pretty 
soon you get to believing it.” [laughter] I 
always thought that was a good remark. 

I hope he’s maintained that attitude. 

He really has. He’s very approachable, very 
down-to-earth. Yes, it was interesting, but it 
was a big shock because I was here alone, and 
really nobody to actually, you know, show me 
the ropes. All of a sudden these boxes of paper 
started arriving, and I had my secretary, who 
had been with me for a long time in the law 
firm, but she didn’t know anything about the 
court, nor did I. I didn’t have any law clerks 
yet, but I got them fairly soon. But none of us 
were much in tune with how the court was 
operating, so for the first few months it was 
quite interesting. The other thing is that when 
I had moved over to the office building, one of 
the things they didn’t have is any bookshelves 
for quite a long time, it seemed like, several 
months. No bookshelves around, and so we 
were serpentining the books on the floor, 
[laughter] 

Who was your secretary at the time? 

Mina Harris. She came with me from the 
law firm to the bench, and was with me for a 
total of twenty-four years. 

Oh, that’s great. That was a very important part 
of your workload. 



72 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


Yes. My current secretary, Mary Smotony, 
has been with me for sixteen years. 

You must be a good guy to work for. You keep 
loyal employees. What did you do? You didn’t 
have judicial experience. Of course, you were 
an experienced litigator, but that’s not the same 
thing as being on the bench. What did you do? 
How did you decide how to proceed? 

I remember the first day I came to the 
office, and I couldn’t even figure out how to 
work the phone. So, I went home at noon 
and I told Barbara, I said, “It’s useless. It’s 
just better for me to come home, because I 
don’t know what all is happening, and I can’t 
even work the phone.” But the next day I felt 
better, [laughter] We just kind of started in. 
Actually, the members of the court were very 
helpful, and it was just the fact that they were 
away, but when I went around to talk to them, 
I got some good ideas. I went down to Judge 
Kennedy’s chambers, and talked to him as to 
how he had his office set up, and then I went 
down and spent a few days in San Francisco, 
and went around to the various judges to get 
ideas of how to do it, and that all was very 
helpful. After I’d gone through all this, they 
suggested that maybe it would be a good 
thing to have a manual for new judges, so they 
thought that I’d be the one to whip up the new 
manual, which I did. 

Well, good for you. 

And I do think it did help other judges 
that came on. 

I think that’s important to have something like 
that. How long did it take you to get law clerks? 

I think I had them in about two weeks. 


Oh, really? 

Yes. Actually Judge Kennedy was a big help 
to me because he had some people who he had 
interviewed before in selecting his law clerks. 
At that time, we had two law clerks. I selected 
one from McGeorge and the other graduated 
from UCLA. 

And do you remember their names? 

Yes. One is Greg Marshall and the other is 
Ron Peck. 

And when did you first have calendar? 

The first thing was I sat on an en banc case. 
Oh really? Tell me about that. 

It was U.S. v. Loud Hawk and it involved 
someone who was charged with transporting 
explosives, Loud Hawk was. He was a Native 
American, and the big issue was that the agents 
who had gotten the explosives had gone out 
and exploded some of it, but had not kept 
anything around much but the wrappers, and 
so the problem was that the defense wanted 
to see if this truly was explosive. They were 
entitled to examine the evidence, and the 
evidence had been destroyed so that was the 
big issue. And I remember thinking whether 
I should just sit there and shut up or whether 
I should ask some questions, and I thought, 
no I’m on the court. I’m going to ask some 
questions. So I did. 

And in this en banc hearing—how many judges 
heard this appeal? 

There were twelve at that time. The court 
had authorized judgeships of thirteen, I was 



The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 


73 


filling one vacancy, and there was still another 
vacancy that Judge Tang shortly thereafter 
filled about a month after. 

And after hearing the oral arguments, what 
happened? 

Well, then we had our conference, and they 
had a process that was a shock to me, that they 
have the most junior judge speak first and that 
was kind of a daunting thing to happen right at 
that moment, because here I was with judges 
that I really didn’t know that well, and I was 
having to give my analysis of this case that I 
had just sat on, but it worked out all right. The 
judges were very kind. 

Well that kind of leads to my other question. 
Was there kind of a period of being a freshman 
on the court, where obviously in this situation, 
that your most junior person goes first or are 
there other things like that? 

Yes. There are. The seating is that way. 
Quite a lot of things are determined by 
seniority. As the newest person on the court, 
you vote first, and you speak first at the 
conference. I guess other than that really, other 
than the ceremonial aspect of things, it is not 
that great of difference. I mean you’re kind of 
immediately accepted. I remember one of the 
things I should mention to you. When I first 
went in to meet the chief judge, who was then 
Judge Browning, I thought, this is probably an 
elderly gentlemen who will be rather severe, 
and so I went in to meet this enthusiastic, 
bright-eyed, very young looking man, and it 
was a big shock to see him as the chief judge. 
He was very kind. He wanted me very much to 
move to San Francisco. That was his big pitch 
at the time. He was trying to get all, as many of 
the judges as possible, to live in San Francisco. 


He wasn’t too successful with that? 

No, no he wasn’t. One of the other things 
that I remember about the initial time on 
the court was when I met Judge [Richard] 
Chambers, who was also very nice, and he had 
brought in a desk into my chambers in San 
Francisco that he had gotten from the Carson 
City federal courthouse when it closed, and 
it had been the desk for four different district 
judges in Nevada. It had a little plate on it that 
showed all the four district judges. I thought 
that was an awfully nice welcome to the court. 

That is nice. What happened to that desk? Do 
you know? 

I still use it in San Francisco. 

Do you? 

It’s a very nice desk. Leather top, and yes 
it’s a very nice desk. The other thing, as you no 
doubt know, Judge Chambers had a manner 
of speaking that was very hesitant and he 
had a manner of kind of looking at you with 
his eyes half closed, and then have this very 
hesitant manner of speaking. I wasn’t sure if it 
was a speech impediment, or if it was a habit, 
so I fairly timidly asked Judge [Benjamin] 
Duniway when I was going around, just 
so I’d know, I said, “Is Judge Chambers’ 
hesitant method of speaking, is that a speech 
impediment that he has or is it just a habit?” 
He said, “It’s a weapon.” [laughter] 

And from what I’ve heard it was a very effective 
weapon at times. 

That’s right. Yes, it was, I think. He was a 
very unique individual, Judge Chambers, with 
a tremendous sense of humor. 



74 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


Judge Chambers has a reputation of being quite 
an individual. Other reminiscences that you 
have of him? 

He’d been on a committee to see what 
could be done about a bill that was impending 
called “The Nunn-DeConcini Bill” and 
the Nunn-DeConcini bill was to establish 
a national court to discipline judges who 
violated judicial conduct rules, and Judge 
Chambers called it the “Judicial Hazing Act.” 
When I was appointed, he resigned from 
the committee, and had me appointed in his 
place, and so I went to some of the meetings. 
I thought that we couldn’t, as a court, just 
say, “Well, no, we’re not going to do this. We 
had to have some kind of an alternative that 
if we’re not going to do this we should be 
doing something else. And we had talked 
about having it done in the judicial councils, 
and I thought this was a very good idea. 
Well, Judge Chambers, I don’t think thought 
it was a very good idea and at the very first 
Ninth Circuit Judicial Conference I went 
to, this was brought up. He spoke from the 
floor, and when he spoke from the floor there 
was no hesitant speech. I mean he did very 
well, and he was criticizing this committee 
recommendation. It seemed to have a lot of 
my quotes in it. I would have rather been 
more anonymous. And he said what he was 
concerned about was that the committee was 
offering it in good faith. That seemed like 
an odd thing to say, but he said, “I’d like to 
illustrate that with a story about my father.” 

Then he related the story about his father 
who was opposed to having the city build a 
very expensive fountain in the town square. So 
what he did is he went around to the various 
churches, and he mentioned to the Mormon 
Church that it should be named the Brigham 
Young Fountain, and to the Methodist 
Church, the John Wesley Fountain would be 


an appropriate name, and the Martin Luther 
Fountain, the St. Augustine Fountain. As a 
result of the turmoil he created, the fountain 
was never built, and he said, “Now if that is the 
purpose of this committee recommendation, 
I’m all for it.” [laughter] 

Do you have any other stories about Judge 
Chambers? 

I have one other one that always intrigued 
me. Judge Chambers and Judge Walter Ely 
were very close friends, and they kidded each 
other a lot. Both in person and at dinners, 
whenever Judge Chambers would call to 
Judge Ely’s office and his secretary would 
say, “Well, he isn’t in right now. He’s over at 
the library studying Jeremy Bentham.” Of 
course, Judge Chambers didn’t believe a word 
of that. When Judge Chambers was over in 
London at London College, he noticed that 
they have in a glass case the body of Jeremy 
Bentham preserved. He went up, actually 
did, go up to the president and wanted to 
see what the procedure was, how they went 
about preserving Jeremy Bentham’s body in 
this glass case, he said, because there is a very 
famous Texas judge in the western United 
States, and this would be very appropriate to 
put his body in a glass case in the courthouse 
in Pasadena. And I guess they were taking 
him seriously, and he went on and on with it. 
Some way or another, he got a postcard with 
this Jeremy Bentham in a glass case, and he 
superimposed Walter Ely’s head on it and sent 
it out as a Christmas card, [laughter] 

The other thing that was remarkable about 
him was getting the courthouse in Pasadena. 
First of all, they said it couldn’t be done. The 
GSA wanted it in Los Angeles, he wanted it 
in Pasadena at what had been originally the 
Vista del Arroyo Hotel, and later became a 
hospital during World War II, and then it had 



The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 


75 


been allowed to just sit and deteriorate. And 
he thought it’d make a great courthouse, and 
he was pushing for it and GSA said, “No, it 
can’t be done because that’s not a designated 
place for the court to sit.” Well, nothing like 
that stopped Judge Chambers. He arranged 
with the city that we could sit in the City 
Hall, and arranged for a place that we had 
offices in a savings and loan building when 
we went over there. One panel a month 
would go over, and conduct hearings in 
City Hall, so that solved that problem. There 
were many other problems that he was able 
to overcome, but the story I like was that he 
wrote to the regional director of the GSA, and 
said that they were holding the thirtieth year 
anniversary of the GSA allowing the building 
to deteriorate, and he would like to have the 
names and pictures of all the past directors so 
they could be appropriately recognized. The 
director wrote back and said, “You know, I 
don’t have the names and pictures of all these 
directors.” Judge Chambers wrote back and 
said, “That’s fine. Just send me your picture.” 
[laughter] 

That’s a great story. When you came onto the 
court, was Judge Chambers a senior judge at 
that point? 

He was. 

Did you ever sit on a panel with him? 

Yes. A number of times. 

What was he like on a panel? 

At that time, the senior judge presided, 
and he would have a calling of the cases. Each 
of the attorneys for their case would stand up 
and say who he or she was representing and the 
argument time necessary. That ritual would 


consume about fifteen minutes and the first 
one would say, “Yes, I’m here and I think we’re 
going to need our full thirty minutes.” And 
Judge Chambers would say, “I can’t imagine 
this is going to take thirty minutes. Don’t you 
think you can do it in twenty?” Well, they 
maybe thought they could. And so as they 
kept standing up the time would get shorter 
and shorter. “Well, yes, I think seven minutes 
would be just fine.” Then we would hear the 
cases. This was always kind of a source of 
frustration to me. After cramming everybody 
down to this time, then almost always Judge 
Chambers would take about fifteen or twenty 
minutes telling a story somewhere along the 
line. They were usually pretty funny stories, 
but I always thought that was not really a 
good thing from the standpoint of the way the 
attorneys must have felt. He would frequently 
pen out his dispositions on a yellow pad right 
on the bench when he was there. Very short. 

What was he like in conference? 

He was a very smart man, and he would 
express himself, but not try to bulldoze his 
opinion at all. He’d just say what he thought, 
and if he didn’t agree with you, he’d write a 
very persuasive dissent. I remember well, 
because Judge [Warren] Ferguson, Judge 
Chambers, and I were on a panel, and Judge 
Ferguson felt very strongly one way and Judge 
Chambers didn’t. It had to do with whether 
there was a reasonable suspicion to stop a van, 
and I was convinced by Judge Ferguson and 
so I wrote the opinion, and Judge Chambers 
wrote a dissent. When I got the dissent back 
I thought this sounds pretty good after all. 
But we went ahead and filed it that way. The 
Supreme Court unanimously reversed it. 
That was the first case I had that went to the 
Supreme Court, and it was right away starting 
off with a unanimous reversal, [laughter] 




11 

Preparing for Oral Argument, 
Conferences, and Opinion Writing 


I’d like to ask you a little bit about panels and 
your own preparation. How do you go about 
preparing for a panel? 

Well, I like to prepare in a concentrated 
time, shortly before argument. Other judges 
do it differently; everyone has their own way 
Some do it the way I do; others do it early on. 
I like to do it like cramming for final exams 
in college, so that all of the facts are familiar 
to me, I don’t have to go back again and 
again. I kind of set my schedule so that the 
earlier part of the time, in between calendars, 
I’m working on the dispositions from the 
past calendar, and then shortly before oral 
argument, like say, the week before, I really 
start preparing very hard for the calendar, 
and I spend a lot of time, nights there too, 
when I’m there in between cases. To me, that 
works best, because I feel like I’m really on 
top of the case, the five cases or six that we’re 
arguing that day. Every judge does it a little 
differently, but that’s the way I like to do it the 
best. And I like to go to argument with not 


having completely made up my mind. I like 
to keep it open. I don’t like to have the judges 
confer ahead of time and say what points we 
think are significant or any of that. I like a 
free-flowing discussion, so that on the bench 
we’re getting the judges asking the questions 
that they think are important. It just seems 
to me that is a more open process without 
foreclosing something before argument. 

Are there some judges on the court who like to 
confer ahead of time? 

That has not been a general practice, at 
all, but there have been suggestions that we 
do that. I’m not aware of any panels really that 
do that. I think everyone goes in fresh with 
their own preparation. 

That’s a very intensive work style, it sounds 
to me. What you do as preparation, almost 
immediately before you’re going to hear the 
argument. Do you use your law clerks in this 
process? 



78 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


Yes. I have my law clerks prepare my files 
in a particular way so that I have the briefs 
there, the bench memo there, all of the key 
cases, any statutes that are involved, and the 
opinion of the district court, all in a certain 
place in the file so that when I’m studying a 
case, I can turn quickly, say from the brief, to 
look at the statute that’s involved or the key 
case. That’s part of the reason I think that I 
prefer to prepare just before because the files 
are all prepared, and they’re all set up so that I 
really can go through it intensely right there. I 
have everything I need right in that file. And I 
can just, like if I’m reading a brief, and I think 
there is a point that is really important, then 
I go to the key case or I go to the statute. 

Is this a technique that someone showed you? 

It kind of developed over a period of time. 
It sounds like a good system. 

It works well for me. And I have a booklet 
that I use that has all of the cases for the week 
in it, and I write on the front of a sheet for 
each case. I write a paragraph summarizing 
the case so that it brings the key facts to my 
mind and then I have another page there that 
I make additional notes about what I think 
are appropriate questions or things I want 
to know and then a page where I take notes 
from oral argument. And that’s very helpful 
because it keeps me very organized. I have a 
table of contents at the beginning showing 
which judges are involved, which judge’s 
chambers prepared the bench memo, and 
what the weight of the case is. I’ll show it to 
you if you want. 

Oh, Id like to see that. So the preparation for 
calendar is a very intense experience. 


Yes, it is. 

When you’re hearing a case, you’re taking 
notes? 

Yes. 

At the oral argument and then at the end of 
the day, I guess, when the judges retire for 
conference? 

Right. 

How does that work when in the conference? 
How does that usually go? 

That’s the place for seniority. The most 
junior judge tells how he or she sees the case 
and then we express our views in order of 
seniority. It isn’t that rigid, but that’s generally 
what we do. When I’m presiding, I’ll turn to 
the most junior judge, and I’ll say, “How do 
you see the case?” or “These are the four issues, 
how do you see issue one?” something like 
that. Then we talk about it, and we maybe try 
to convince each other one way or another. 
An awful lot of discussion goes on while on 
the bench, with the help of the attorneys, 
during oral argument, and that’s why I’m so 
very much for oral argument. I’m a big fan 
of oral argument because part of it is when a 
judge is asking a question to convince another 
judge sometimes it’s been pretty thoroughly 
explored in the oral argument with the judges’ 
questions. When we get to the conference on 
the cases, they are generally a lot shorter than 
I thought they would have been because it’s 
been pretty well explored in oral argument, 
and by that time people have fairly firm 
views. Then after the conference, I’ll dictate a 
memorandum of what we decided. Whoever 
is the presiding judge assigns who writes the 



Preparing for Oral Argument, Conferences, and Opinion Writing 


79 


opinions. When the opinion is received by 
my office, the clerk who’s been working with 
me on that case will review it and say that 
corresponds with what I was saying and then 
I’ll review it. But I like to have the clerk look at 
it first. I always assign one clerk to every case 
to see if they see something before I look at it. 

In writing opinions, how do you go about that? 

I draft, from that conference, kind of an 
outline of what I want to do, and I have the 
clerk do the first draft and then I work from 
that. Sometimes I can use it and sometimes 
I can’t. And sometimes I use quite a bit of it 
and sometimes I use just a little bit of it and 
write a lot of it myself. 

Do you find yourself writing several drafts? I 
mean working from that first initial draft, do 
you then find yourself writing several of your 
own drafts? 

Yes, on the difficult cases, yes. On the 
difficult cases, I find myself writing several, 
quite a few drafts. 

Do you work in long hand? 

I do that and dictation. Sometimes I’ll 
write out an outline of those things I want to 
say and then dictate it, then from that draff, 
that will be a rough draft that will have to 
come back to me first and then I’ll smooth 
that out and rearrange it and so forth. I’m 
sure that I probably will be like those who 
have gone to the computer, but I find the 
dictating works pretty well for me if I outline 
my thoughts and dictate it and then I get a 
draft back and they can type faster than I can. 

In panels, do the senior judges still preside? 


No, they no longer do. It’s the senior active 
judge. 

Oh, so you might have a judge who’s taken 
senior status on a panel but they wouldn’t 
necessarily be the presiding judge? 

Right. But the senior active judge does 
preside. That, I guess, was your question? 

Right. I imagine there are personalities—there 
are stronger personalities than others in the 
court. Are some people more persuasive than 
others in this court? 

Yes. Maybe more forceful is the better way 
to say it. Sometimes persons can be very 
persuasive in the manner in which they’ve 
written things and not as persuasive orally. 
Each of the judges is very independent. They 
are independent thinkers, and I would say 
none of the judges goes along just to make 
someone else happy. They go along because 
they’re convinced. 

Of the judges who are no longer on the court, 
with whom you’ve sat with, I don’t want to 
put you in the position of having to comment 
necessarily on people currently on the court, but 
are there people that you sat with on the court 
who stand out in your mind? 

Yes. I thought that Charles Merrill was an 
ideal judge. 

In what way? 

If I were to model myself after one, he’d 
be a very good model. He was extremely 
fair. He was very polite to counsel. He had 
a very pleasant manner in presiding over 
oral argument and a very pleasant manner 



80 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


in presiding at conference with the judges. 
He was an extremely bright person who 
thought through things very well and had 
virtually no prejudices that I could discern. 
He approached each case open-mindedly and 
reasoned his way through, and then he had 
this beautiful resonant voice. He just looked 
like a judge, and he, with this resonant voice, 
was kind of a commanding appearance, I 
thought. Actually, I replaced him when he 
took senior status. He was the Nevada judge 
that I was appointed to replace. He had been 
on the Nevada Supreme Court, too. Id tried 
cases there in front of him. 

And he passed away ? 

No, he’s still alive. 

He’s still alive? He lives in the Bay area ? 

Yes, he does. He doesn’t hear cases any 
more. He has some health problems that 
prevent him from doing so. But he’s still a very 
likeable, jovial man. I saw him at Christmas. 
That was the last time I saw him. 



12 

The Circuit Split Controversy 


One of the issues that has come up in the course 
of these interviews that we really haven’t talked 
about is the efforts by some in the Congress to 
split the Ninth Circuit. I understand that you’ve 
been involved in testifying before Congress and 
representing the Ninth Circuit in these hearings. 
Is that right? 

Actually, I have not testified before 
Congress, but I have been very heavily 
involved. During the past years, I think 
there have been four efforts to split the Ninth 
Circuit. In about 1978, there was an effort 
to split both the Ninth Circuit and the Fifth 
Circuit. The Fifth Circuit initially was not 
in favor of it. Later, the members of the bar 
and the judges all decided that was the wisest 
thing. The Ninth Circuit took a different tack, 
and it determined that a larger court could 
work well with an en banc court being less 
than all of the judges and by experimenting 
with administrative units. And so that was the 
first attempt to split the Ninth Circuit. 

Since then, there have been several other 
attempts. None of them ever got past the 


Judiciary Committee of the Senate except 
this last one. And in the last situation, Senate 
Bill 956 was introduced to divide the Ninth 
Circuit by splitting off the five northern states. 
That would be Alaska, Washington, Oregon, 
Idaho, and Montana, and that didn’t appear 
it was going to pass. That was the bill on 
which they had the hearings, several judges 
appeared. Judge Wallace appeared on behalf 
of our court because he was chief judge at 
that time, Judge O’Scannlain appeared. Judge 
O’Scannlain’s approach was that he thought 
eventually the Ninth Circuit should be split, 
but that he didn’t favor this split. He favored a 
split that would have divided California. That 
bill was not going to pass. 

There was also a companion bill that had 
been drafted by Senator [Dianne] Feinstein 
and that was to create a commission to 
study the circuit structure throughout the 
country, not just the Ninth Circuit. That was 
voted on, and it failed by one vote to pass the 
committee. Then Senator Conrad Burns, who 
was managing this latest circuit split, along 
with Senator Slade Gordon from Washington, 



82 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


decided on a different kind of split that might 
pass the committee. That was to add Nevada 
and Arizona to the five states, leaving only 
California and Hawaii as the Ninth Circuit, 
and the new circuit would be composed of the 
seven states. This was appealing to Arizona 
Senator Kyle because it was designated in 
the revised bill that the circuit headquarters 
would be in Phoenix, Arizona. That did pass 
the committee, barely and, at that time, it 
was thought that there would probably be 
some further opportunities to buy some 
time to address that particular split before 
it was voted on by the Senate. However, 
about the time I became chief judge, which 
was March 1st of this year, 1996, it seemed 
like it was developing a head of steam and 
might go forward and move in a few weeks 
so I appointed a committee to strategize this 
whole thing, as to how to handle it. 

Who was on that committee? 

Judge Browning, as the chairman, John 
Frank, an attorney from Phoenix, Judge 
Wiggins, Judge Schroeder, and me. We also 
had some staff who were assisting us. 

Right. 

Judge Browning and I went back to 
Washington, D.C., because we thought there 
was some urgency. At that time, when I first 
became chief judge, I sent out a letter to all 
the judges in our circuit, requesting them to 
send letters to all of their senators and quite a 
number of them did. I thought it was going to 
move quickly and that it’s important to have 
the senators realize that the people on the 
Ninth Circuit are not in favor of this. Six bar 
associations had all voted to keep it the way it 
was, and we had three successive resolutions 
opposing the split passed at our annual Ninth 


Circuit Judicial Conference. They passed 
overwhelmingly to keep the circuit intact. 
I think about eighty to eighty-five percent 
voted for that. An overwhelming number of 
judges was opposed to the split and in favor 
of keeping it the way it was, so we thought it 
was important to get that message out. We 
also drafted a position paper, which we sent 
to all the senators, but we felt the personal 
contact was also very important and, as it 
turned out, it was. Judge Browning and I 
went around to probably twenty-five senators’ 
offices and spoke to either the senator or the 
staff member that was involved with this. We 
got a great deal of help from Senator [Harry] 
Reid and Senator Feinstein. They were the two 
who were leading the fight against the split. 
We went to D.C., I believe on Monday, March 
11, and we started meeting people during the 
course of that week. Thursday night, about 
10:30, an amendment to the Bill 956 was 
introduced, which passed by unanimous 
consent to appoint a commission, as Senator 
Feinstein’s bill had proposed. We were rather 
happy with that, except that we found out by 
the next morning there is a process in the 
Senate, whereby a secondary amendment is 
possible, and the secondary amendment does 
not require the unanimous consent. Senator 
Conrad Burns introduced the secondary 
amendment, which was to split the circuit 
as was originally proposed. The difficulty of 
it was that it was attached to the continuing 
appropriations bill, which shut down the 
government, so there was great urgency, and 
also there was no ability to filibuster. 

When Judge Browning and I went back, 
we thought that if we were able to obtain 
enough commitments from senators, the 
bill would not have sixty votes. It takes 
sixty votes to end a filibuster, so the Senate 
generally does not proceed on a matter unless 
the proponents have sixty votes. We were 



The Circuit Split Controversy 


83 


aiming for forty-one votes, and we felt pretty 
confident we had that because there were both 
Democrats and Republicans that had come to 
our point of view because it appeared to be an 
anti-environmental measure. A number of the 
senators, I think, had been pressed by some 
of their contributors, contending that liberal 
judges from California were making rulings 
on environmental laws that were adverse to 
business interests. A number of senators that 
were contacted also felt that they should not 
be dividing or restructuring a circuit based 
upon the decisions that particular judges 
had made at a particular time in history. The 
problem was that in this procedural posture, 
the bill could no longer be filibustered, so we 
were then looking at, what, in effect, was only 
a majority vote would be required for the bill 
to pass the Senate. Senator Reid and Senator 
Feinstein were most upset by this use of the 
unanimous consent process because a lot of 
legislation is done in that fashion. They felt 
this was, in effect, a trick, which it was. They 
expressed the opinion of the Democratic 
leadership, “Look if this is going to be the way 
that procedure is used, there aren’t going to 
be any more unanimous consents. 

That, in turn, was a concern to the 
Republican leadership as well. So much really 
takes that kind of a process to get things 
done. Because the leadership of both parties 
were concerned that this was an abuse of 
the unanimous consent process, pressure 
was put on Senator Burns to amend the 
bill so as to, instead, substitute the creation 
of the commission to study the structure 
of the circuits nationwide. We were very 
happy about it. That is now where it stands. 
It’s in the House. It’s in the House Judiciary 
Committee, and the subcommittee is headed 
by Congressman [Carlos] Morehead. 

Oh, from Glendale. 


Yes. And that at this stage of the game 
nothing further has happened. There are an 
awful lot of things going on with Congress 
and whether they’ll get to that or not, I don’t 
know. 

Well, I guess this is a lesson in the byzantine 
rules of the Senate, isn’t it? 

Yes, it certainly was. It was quite an 
operation. We stayed over the weekend until 
that compromise was in place. 

You mentioned that part of the motivation — 
the suspected motivation of the sponsors of the 
bill—was their opposition to environmental 
decisions that the court might have made in the 
past. Turning the issue around, what would you 
say are the arguments for keeping the circuit 
whole, as it is presently constituted? 

First of all, it works very well. I think 
that it’s better to have an approach whereby 
circuits can be larger without having a greater 
number of small circuits. Because this would 
create a problem for the Supreme Court and 
result in splits of the circuits on cases more 
than there are now. But even more important 
than that, is the fact that there really is a 
significant importance to being able to resolve 
the federal law within the nine-state area, 
Guam, and the Mariana Islands, so that we 
have consistent law throughout that entire 
area. It does take a little more time and effort 
on our part to do that because we have to 
be aware of panel decisions that might be 
inconsistent. We have taken a lot of steps over 
the years and developed a process to assure 
that we don’t have conflicts. We have a process 
of issue identification, so that panels are aware 
of similar cases that are before other panels. 
Decisions that have just been rendered are 
brought immediately to our attention. The first 



84 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


panel that has a particular issue has priority to 
decide it so maybe another panel will wait for 
it. The administration of the circuit adds some 
real pluses. One is the fact that we can have a 
circuit executives office with a larger staff that 
is able to assist with employment problems 
and technical equipment problems. Another 
advantage is the fact that we can transfer 
judges, bankruptcy judges, and district judges, 
from areas that, for one reason or other, 
have a lesser caseload to an impacted area. 
Sometimes in an area, we have vacancies that 
have not been filled for a long time or there 
has been large growth since the last district 
judge or bankruptcy judge was approved. We 
have a lot of cooperation within our circuit 
in transferring judges, senior judges, as well 
as active judges. One time, Hawaii, because 
it hadn’t had an appointment in the longest 
period, had vacancies there, and we were 
sending judges to Hawaii to help. As it happens 
now, Hawaii has a lesser caseload per judge 
and so some of the Hawaii judges come over 
to help with Nevada, Arizona, and Idaho, and 
other areas that have some caseload problems. 
And that has been a very valuable thing. 

An additional advantage is one that 
other circuits don’t recognize, and that is 
that there’s a real strength in diversity among 
the circuit judges, both geographical, as well 
as background. For example, if a panel is 
composed of a judge from Arizona, Alaska, 
and Idaho, there is a learning experience 
because each judge has a slightly different 
perspective. You just might see something 
differently than you did otherwise. I have 
certainly found it to be a strength over the 
years to have had the experience with a variety 
of judges. 

Well, what do you say to the argument that if 
you had a smaller circuit, then the judges would 
be more responsive to the geography in which 


they reside. That is to say, if you had a circuit 
that was Montana, Washington, and Idaho, 
for example, wouldn’t the judges in Montana 
be more responsive to the wishes of the people 
in Montana? 

Yes, that’s the very reason why I think 
that we shouldn’t have a circuit split. We’re 
interpreting federal law that applies to 
the whole nation. There shouldn’t be a 
different federal law for Montana than there 
is for Hawaii or Alabama or New York. We’re 
interpreting federal law and it should be 
consistent. We’re certainly making it consistent 
within the nine western states. We should not 
have one rule of admiralty for California and 
another for Alaska and another for Hawaii. 
We’ve got to have a rule that applies to all. 
Well that’s sort of a basic tenant that you learn 
in law school, isn’t it? 

Yes. 

Someone has suggested that perhaps a fund 
ought to be started to send Senator Burns to law 
school, [laughter] I won’t ask you to comment 
on that. Well, if there is one federal law, would 
you say then that there isn’t a Ninth Circuit 
jurisprudence or judicial philosophy that would 
characterize the Ninth Circuit? 

I think that what happens is that the 
Ninth Circuit gets some very interesting 
cases throughout its nine western states and 
interpreting those cases sometimes provides 
a new rule of law. But basically, if we haven’t 
ruled on an issue, we look very carefully at 
what other circuits have done. We don’t always 
agree, nor do other circuits necessarily agree 
with what we do, but we certainly do review 
that precedent and are hesitant to disagree 
with any of them unless we see strong reasons 
to do so, and sometimes there are. 



13 


Significant Cases 


I want to ask you about some of the more 
significant cases that you have heard while 
you’ve been on the court of appeals. Do any, 
in particular, come to mind? 

I think that I’ve written perhaps about 
four hundred fifty opinions since I’ve been 
with the court. 

And how many years is that? 

Eighteen years. And those are published 
opinions. I guess the total cases are about 
twelve hundred to thirteen hundred. I 
think that two cases, in addition to those 
we earlier discussed, that come to my mind 
are procedural cases, which were important 
from the standpoint of the manner in which 
the law is administered. One case was Matter 
of McLinn. That involved a situation where 
we’re interpreting state law. We used to have 
a doctrine that was followed throughout the 
other circuits that gave special deference in 
the interpretation of state law to a district 
judge who was sitting in that state. That always 


struck me as being very awkward because the 
interpretation of state law is really what the 
appellate court should be doing, apart from 
deference to the interpretation of the trial 
judge, just as is done with the interpretation 
of federal law. To give deference to the 
interpretation of state law by the judge who 
happens to be sitting in the state seems to be 
in an ad hominem way to arrive at the law, 
and not a very accurate way either, because 
the district judge may not have experience in 
that area of the law yet and may not have been 
especially familiar with it. 

This case was the perfect case for 
discussing that problem. It was a boating 
accident involving Alaska state law, and the 
district judge in Alaska had ruled one way 
in interpreting Alaska law. Our circuit panel 
that heard the appeal included Judge [Robert] 
Boochever, who had been on the Alaska 
Supreme Court for several years before he 
was appointed to the federal court and had a 
lot of experience with Alaska law. He wrote 
the panel opinion and deferred to the district 
judge’s interpretation of Alaska law, but he 



86 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


said he would have decided it the other way if 
he were interpreting Alaska law, without that 
deference. The case was then taken en banc 
and the decision was very close. It was six-to- 
five. Judge [Mary] Schroeder was to write the 
majority opinion, which affirmed our existing 
law, and I was to write the dissent. I wrote the 
dissent, and I convinced one other judge to 
go along with me so it just switched around 
with Judge Schroeder writing the dissent. Her 
dissent was kind of interesting, as she attached 
all the pages of Westlaw where all the courts 
throughout the country had ruled the other 
way Professor Charles Allen Wright got very 
interested, and he was, in effect, keeping score 
and letting Judge Schroeder and I know which 
law school reviews favored Judge Schroeder s 
position or Judge Hug’s position. One of the 
law reviews had a one hundred page article on 
this question. Our case never got taken to the 
Supreme Court but another case from New 
England did, and the Supreme Court ruled 
in the manner in which I had, six-to-three. 
Judge Schroeder wrote a complementary 
note, saying that, “Now, the final vote is in,” 
or something to that effect. But we had some 
fun with that case. 

Can you explain who Professor Charles Allen 
Wright is? 

Yes. I should have. Professor Charles Allen 
Wright is a very noted law professor at the 
University of Texas who has written a multi¬ 
volume work on federal procedure. He’s now, 
by the way, the president of the American Law 
Institute. 

Since then state law has been decided with 
a different procedure, [laughter] 

Well, I’m glad you set them right. Especially 
those courts in New England. Those people 
need to be set right every now and then by the 


westerners. What other cases come to mind 
when you think back about significant cases 
in which you’ve been involved? 

There was another one that was kind 
of like this. It was a very recent case. It’s 
United States v. Gaudin. That was a question 
in perjury cases or cases where persons are 
charged with making false statements to a 
federal official. The question was whether 
the statement was “material,” as opposed to 
just an unimportant misstatement. Whether 
it was material or not was always viewed as 
a question of law. It seemed to me this was a 
jury question. A district judge in our circuit 
had written a very good opinion, saying that 
this did not make sense in light of some of the 
Supreme Court’s more recent rulings that all 
elements of a crime have to be determined 
by the jury. It was very hard to see how this 
was not an element of crime. And yet, it was 
being determined by the court. 

Do you recall who the district judge was who 
recalled the opinion? 

Yes: Eugene Lynch. United States v. Taylor 
was his opinion. It was excellent. And he said 
that he realized all the other circuits in the 
country ruled the other way, but that it was 
time we saw that the emperor had no clothes. 
But anyway, that issue came to the panel of 
our court with Judge [Clifford] Wallace, Judge 
[Pamela] Rymer, and me. I wrote the opinion 
that materiality was an element of the crime 
and a jury question. The case was then taken 
en banc. We had a very interesting discussion. 
It was a six-to-five majority, and I wrote the 
majority opinion affirming the panel decision. 
Judge [Alex] Kozinski wrote the dissent. Judge 
Kozinski’s dissent was very much like Judge 
Schroeder’s, in that he wrote three solid pages 
of all the other circuits that had ruled the 



Significant Cases 


87 


other way. He stated in his dissent that “courts 
of appeals’ opinions frequently raise waves 
on the waters of the law. Todays opinion is 
more akin to a tsunami.” Certiorari was taken 
by the Supreme Court on that case. Justice 
[Antonin] Scalia wrote the opinion, and the 
court unanimously affirmed my opinion. It is 
interesting that right about that time there had 
been a projected tsunami in Hawaii, a huge 
tidal wave. 

Oh, a real one. 

It was developing toward the Island of 
Hawaii. There was great concern for Kauai. 
All of a sudden the wind shifted, and the tidal 
wave never reached Kauai. So I wrote to Judge 
Kozinski and I said, “This could be known as 
a ‘Kozinski tsunami.’” [laughter] 

Did he write back? 

He did; he was a very good sport about it. 

Are there other cases involving changes in 
federal procedure that you’ve been involved in? 

There was a case that has an interesting 
story behind it. These cases probably are 
not great civil rights cases, but they do have 
interesting stories. The other one was a case 
that was a labor case. I was on a panel with, 
then, Judge [Anthony] Kennedy, when he 
was still on our court. Right about the time 
I’d written the opinion, and he had written 
the dissent, he was elevated to the Supreme 
Court, and the Supreme Court took this 
case on certiorari, [laughter] It seemed 
like a sure reversal to me. Justice Kennedy 
recused himself so only eight justices sat on 
the case. When the opinion of the court was 
announced, he sent me a copy of the opinion, 
writing on it, “You were not affirmed by a 


full court but it was a unanimous one. May 
it always be so.” [laughter] I thought that was 
very classy. It couldn’t be a full court because 
he was recused and there were only eight 
justices ruling on it. 

That’s nice. Well, I know that he was very 
helpful to you when you first came on the 
court here. 

Yes, he was. 

And I guess you’ve kept up that relationship 
over time. 

Yes, we have. 

Do you recall the name of that case? 

Yes, I think it was Linn v. Amalgamated 
Brotherhood. 

Are there other areas of law in which you’ve 
written decisions that stand out in your mind? 

There was a case, DeWitt v. Wilson. It 
was a three-judge panel, and I sat with two 
district judges, Judge Garcia and Judge Burell, 
and it was reviewing the redistricting of the 
California election districts. It was a very 
difficult case because at the time they did the 
redistricting, they were trying to apply the 
statute, voting statute, which had indicated 
that race should be taken into account in 
redistricting. California was trying to apply 
that. The legislature couldn’t agree on how 
to do it so the Supreme Court appointed 
some judicial masters. It appointed three 
state judges to be masters. They developed 
this redistricting with real careful study, I 
thought. They did take race into account. 
After their decision, the Supreme Court in 
the Shaw case declared the consideration of 



88 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


race in particular circumstances in Louisiana 
to be unconstitutional. It was a question of 
applying the Shaw case to what these masters 
had done, not knowing about the Shaw case. 
Well, it just happened they did a very good 
job. It was a very difficult opinion to write, 
because fitting the masters in with what had 
previously been all right but now was quite 
a change in Justice [Sandra Day] O’Connors 
Shaw opinion. But I felt, really, they had done 
the right thing because they had grouped, 
not only just for race but for other reasons, 
like community solidarity and other interests 
that are similar. The Supreme Court last year 
reversed another redistricting case from 
Louisiana. I didn’t even know this case had 
been before them until I read a column, 
where the columnist noted that, “Well, it’s 
true that the Supreme Court reversed a case 
involving Louisiana, but at the same time they 
affirmed in a summary opinion a California 
redistricting case.” I looked it up and it was 
two sentences in a summary affirmance. I 
felt kind of happy about that, [laughter] I’m 
not sure why they didn’t write an opinion on 
that case but, anyway, I was pleased that the 
opinion I worked very hard on was affirmed. 

Well, I’m glad they affirmed your decision 
even though they ruled against the decision 
in the Louisiana case. The Shaw case has had 
significant impact I think, or ultimately will. 

It has. Indeed, it has. 

Do you want to comment a little bit about the 
Shaw case and then I’ll ask you again some 
more about other cases you were involved in. 

Well, I think it does have an impact and 
I think, really considering it in light of the 
fact that they did approve the California 
redistricting, I think the essence of it is that 


race can’t be the primary factor of redistricting, 
and I think that the districts can’t be structured 
in odd geographic patterns. 

Gerrymandering. 

Gerrymandering. I think that race, as a 
factor, can still be considered, and I think 
that’s why they approved the California 
redistricting. 

Other cases that have stories behind them? 

Well, there was a case, an en banc case, 
Olagues v. Russoniello, in which there had 
been an investigation for voter fraud, allowing 
illegal immigrants to vote, and it involved 
the printing of ballots in certain languages. 
The plaintiffs contended it was improper and 
sought damages and injunctive relief. It was 
vigorously argued on both sides. Six judges 
ruled one way on the merits and four judges 
dissented on the merits. I dissented because 
I thought the case was moot. I thought the 
case was moot because the key factors were 
no longer in play. The significant part is 
that this was another one of these summary 
dispositions by the Supreme Court, holding 
that the case is moot, [laughter] I was kidding 
the court that “This is a one-judge victory” 
[laughter] You couldn’t convince me, at the 
time, that this was not moot. 

I’ve sat on some death penalty cases 
and those are all extremely hard. One was 
a Nevada case, Schuman v. Wolff, in which 
Schuman was sentenced to death, and I wrote 
an opinion that the mandatory sentence 
violated the United States Constitution. There 
was a recent case, Mason v. Vasquez. It was a 
California case, in which Mason did not want 
to appeal his denial of habeas corpus. He had 
an attorney who was representing him in 
this regard. Another attorney was appointed 



Significant Cases 


89 


to argue that he was not competent to make 
this decision. There was a competency hearing 
held before Judge [Ronald] Whyte. He did a 
very good job with it. When it came to us, 
it was a situation in which one attorney was 
arguing for Mr. Mason and the other attorney 
was also arguing for Mr. Mason. We held the 
man was competent. He knew exactly what he 
was doing. He committed the murder and did 
not want to continue to sit on death row. A 
very unusual case, and it was just a question 
of whether he was competent to discontinue 
his appellate process. 

That is interesting. It raises the issue of death 
penalty cases in general. Perhaps you could talk 
a little bit about the Ninth Circuit procedure for 
handling death penalty cases. 

The Supreme Court officially declared 
all death penalty statutes in the country 
unconstitutional in 1964. From that point 
on, the law was just beginning to develop, 
as to what death penalty statute would be 
constitutional. Two principal approaches 
were taken. Some states took the position 
just more particularly defining the crime that 
will be accorded the death penalty, whereas 
other states took the approach of defining 
aggravating and mitigating factors that should 
be considered by the jury. The reason why the 
Supreme Court had declared all the statutes 
unconstitutional is they said it was quixotic 
in the way it was applied. The jury was given 
little guidance, so they had great discretion in 
who got the death penalty, regardless of the 
nature of the crime. Well, eventually that was 
sorted out and the aggravating and mitigating 
factors kind of statute was approved and 
the other one disapproved. So it had to be 
individualized sentencing. That process 
had to be refined further in defining what 
aggravating and mitigating factors were. All 


of these matters had to be worked out so a lot 
of time was taken in the state courts ironing 
this out and then the state courts’ decisions 
being appealed to the Supreme Court, then 
the Supreme Court reversing. There was a 
recent case in Montana where a man was 
on death row for fourteen years, but about 
seven of those were taken up by the state to 
the Supreme Court to be reversed again. 

There was a case, Sorenson v. Secretary of the 
Treasury, and if I can find my notes I could 
refresh your memory what that particular case 
is about, but maybe you recall it. 

I do. It had to do with an Internal Revenue 
Service policy of intercepting tax refunds to 
repay to the state the amounts the state had 
put out for child support payments that hadn’t 
been made by the father. In other words, 
when the father didn’t make the child support 
payments, the state would make some sort 
of welfare kind of payments, but they then 
could go back against the father for purposes 
of retrieving those support payments from 
the father. And what was involved there was 
the question of whether they could intercept 
both the tax refund money, normal tax refund 
money, and the income credit money, which 
are not taxes that have been overpaid but, 
instead, amounts that are paid to people who 
haven’t had adequate earnings. Two other 
circuit courts had held that they could not, 
and a couple of other district courts had held 
that they could not. 

The opinion I wrote held that these tax 
repayments were the same as any other 
repayment, and they could, in fact, reach 
those. If it was a community earning, they 
could only reach the one-half that pertained 
to the father’s repayment. The lead plaintiff in 
that case was a woman named Sorenson and 
it was actually her earnings and her earned 



90 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


income credit they were seeking to intercept 
to pay her husband’s debt, but we held they 
could only intercept the one-half community 
property aspect of that. Probably the thing 
that was interesting about the case was the 
fact that the existing precedent in the country 
was to the contrary, and I believe the Supreme 
Court affirmed my opinion eight-to-one. 

That’s always reassuring, isn’t it? 

It is. It doesn’t always happen, but it’s 
reassuring. 

I recall another, I found my notes here, another 
case, Chilicky v. Schweiker, in which the Ninth 
Circuit reversed the district court, allowing 
an action for emotional distress caused by 
wrongful termination of social security 
disability benefits. 

Yes. 

Do you remember this one? 

Now that’s one where the Supreme Court 
reversed the opinion that I wrote. I think it 
was five-to-four. But that was the situation in 
which a class of people in Arizona had had 
their disability payments reviewed. I think 
it was “Continuing Disability Review,” they 
called it. And it had been reviewed under a 
policy that had been established by the Reagan 
administration to cut down on the disability 
payments, and there really had been messages 
sent out from Washington saying that there 
is a certain quota of the number of people 
that we should take off of these rolls. Most of 
these people had finally recovered the amount 
that was due them under the Social Security 
Act, but they had been wrongfully terminated 
for disability payments, but what they were 


seeking was damages against the individuals 
who had promulgated this policy of, in effect, 
a quota being cut off the rolls. In the opinion 
that I wrote, we held that they did have a cause 
of action, spoken of as a Bivens cause of action, 
and that’s when a federal official has deprived 
individuals of their constitutional rights and 
are entitled to damages for that. The Supreme 
Court reversed, holding that when Congress 
had provided a mechanism for recovering the 
lost payments but had provided nothing else, 
that this was a congressional intent that there 
be no thing as a Bivens action in those cases. 

Interesting and complex. 

Yes, it is complex. I always felt it was a 
little unfair because these people were put to 
considerable hardship in not receiving those 
payments for a long period of time because, in 
effect, it had been held to be, truthfully, a very 
wrongful act on the part of the individuals 
that had instituted the policy. I thought they 
should have a constitutional right to recover. 
I still do. 

Well, here’s another case were the Supreme 
Court is wrong, I guess. 

[laughter] That’s right. 

Another case that came to my attention was 
Portland Feminist Women’s Health Center 
v. Advocates for Life, from 1988, and this 
involved the creation of a free zone surrounding 
the clinic. 

That’s right. 

Can you explain your decision in this case? 
Or maybe you can give us some background 
on the case. 



Significant Cases 


91 


Well, what had happened was that there 
were a lot of protests that were going on 
by organized groups that were opposed 
to abortion throughout the country. This 
was part of it. This group had staged 
demonstrations in front of this clinic that 
was performing abortions. Of course, they’re 
perfectly entitled to express their points of 
view, and the fact that they’re opposed to 
abortion, the fact that they’re opposed to this 
clinic performing abortions and opposed to 
the fact that women that are there seeking 
abortions are acting improperly. But what 
was wrong with it was that they were doing 
more than just expressing their views either 
with signs or verbally. What they were doing 
was kind of bumping the women that were 
going into the clinic and allowing a very small 
passageway for them to get through, making 
it very unpleasant physically for the persons 
to go in and really restraining them in lots 
of ways. And then there was also lots of loud 
shouting and chanting and screaming outside 
the window where medical procedures were 
being performed that were having an adverse 
effect on medical procedures. There had been 
a lot of difficulties there, and what the district 
court had done is enter an injunction that said 
that they had to keep a pathway of twenty-five 
feet in front of the clinic where these people 
could pass. The protesters were perfectly 
free to verbally say things on the way in and 
have signs and so forth, but what the district 
court was attempting to do was prevent those 
protesting from physically doing anything 
or from the loud shouting and chanting that 
was disruptive to the medical procedures that 
were involved. 

Then, after the injunction had been 
entered, there had been some further 
violations of that injunction, and so what 
was contested in the appeal that we heard 


in Portland was both the validity of the 
injunction, whether it was too broad, whether 
it was an interference with free speech, and 
also whether the contempt citations had been 
correct. The whole courtroom was filled with 
people. 

Oh, I imagine. 

It was in the Pioneer Courthouse in 
Portland, with the little fireplace in back, and 
this was just filled with people and it was very 
emotional. One of the interesting incidents 
that occurred was that a person who had 
been one of the prime leaders was a minister, 
and before we started the oral argument, the 
attorney for the minister stood up and said 
that he had reached an individual settlement 
with the plaintiffs on this, so that he was no 
longer going to be held in contempt. Everyone 
was turning around looking at him, thinking 
that he had abandoned ship. That was a 
fascinating part of that case. We upheld the 
injunction and the contempt citations. 

I think that case has set something of a 
precedent, hasn’t it? Providing for free zones 
around other clinics? 

Yes, it has. 

Did the Supreme Court review that case? 

It did not. 

You were involved in another, at least one 
other, abortion rights case. National Abortion 
Federation v. Operation Rescue, from 1993, I 
think. Could you comment on that? 

Yes. That again involved protests in front 
of a clinic that was performing abortions and 



92 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


it was, again, part of this national organization, 
Operation Rescue. The technique that 
was being used was to select a particular 
clinic somewhere and bring a whole lot of 
people there that overwhelmed the local law 
enforcement authorities, because there would 
maybe be two thousand people in a place 
where the normal police force would not be 
equipped to deal on-the-spot with that many 
people. That was the technique, and the clinic 
had brought an action based on an old Civil 
War statute, the Klu Klux Klan Act. The part 
of the Act that was pertinent had two clauses: 
the first clause dealt with deprivation of the 
constitutional rights of an individual and the 
second clause they called the “Hindrance 
Clause,” dealt with hindering the police force 
from protecting constitutional rights. And 
there had been a Supreme Court case that 
had interpreted the first clause just shortly 
before we heard this case, and it held that 
that clause of that Act, the first clause, was 
not designed to protect against private action. 
It was only designed to protect against state 
action, state authorities depriving someone 
of constitutional rights. 

The second clause was not construed, and 
it was sent back to the circuit courts and, in 
turn, to the trial court, to take further evidence 
and further try that case because that issue 
had not been raised. Justice [Byron] White 
had resigned from the court, and there was a 
strong indication that the remaining justices 
were split 4-to-4 on the Hindrance Clause. 
The interpretation of the majority of our panel 
was that the Hindrance Clause was different. 
That it was designed to prevent groups from 
overwhelming the local law enforcement 
authorities so that they could not protect the 
constitutional rights of the people. Oddly 
enough, I was certain that the case would be 
heard by the Supreme Court. I mean I would 
have bet ten-to-one, because it was there to be 


resolved. In the meantime, Congress passed 
a statute, however that specifically dealt with 
demonstrations at abortion clinics. And so 
that has never reached the Supreme Court. 

It basically rendered it moot. 

Yes, it did. 

Another interesting case, obviously as 
controversial as anything dealing with abortion, 
is the Compassion in Dying v. Washington. 
Could you comment on that? 

As you say, that certainly is a controversial 
issue throughout the country on very divided 
views. I was with the majority in that en banc 
decision, in which we held that there was a 
constitutional privacy right to manage your 
own fate when a person was terminally ill. 

It was a narrower case than a lot of people 
realize because it really involves persons 
who are terminally ill, and doctors who were 
treating persons who were terminally ill. An 
organization that was seeking only the right 
for those persons who are terminally ill, not 
the broader general suicide, usually it is spoken 
of as a suicide. But what it really amounts to 
is, people who only have a very limited time 
to live and are suffering and are desiring not 
to prolong their life for no purpose and to 
avoid a great deal of pain. There were some 
pretty poignant stories about persons whose 
pain couldn’t be totally controlled with the 
morphine and even those whose can be 
controlled during parts of the time when the 
morphine wears off and have to get it started 
again have severe pain. It always struck me 
as odd that we spend so much worry and 
concern in executing someone as to whether 
they might have a minute or two of suffering, 
and yet we really almost sentence persons who 
are terminally ill to suffer as long as six months 



Significant Cases 


93 


with pain that can be controlled but not totally 
controlled. What, in effect, our opinion held 
was that there was a constitutional right to 
determine when you’re terminally ill how long 
the agony is going to have to continue. 

I hadn’t thought about that distinction that 
you just made between a condemned prisoner 
and someone who is terminally ill with some 
terribly painful disease. That’s interesting. Lots 
of difficult issues that you have to deal with. 

There are very difficult issues. Now, of 
course, the big concern of the persons who 
view it differently is that it could be misused, 
that there might be a tendency to decide that 
some persons life was not worth living and 
to end it without their full consent or without 
them fully understanding what they were 
consenting to or that family members would 
want to be shed of the burden, that sort of 
thing. And those are valid concerns. In my 
view, that’s a matter for regulation to assure 
that that is not the case, but that if the person 
is of sound mind and wants to not continue 
the suffering and to have a doctor be able to 
assist them. 

Yes. This particular issue, of course, has been 
addressed by other societies besides the United 
States. I’m thinking of some of the European 
countries who have enacted “right to die” kinds 
of laws. In general, do you ever look to other 
countries, the laws of other countries to guide 
your thinking in deciding, maybe not this issue, 
but maybe other issues? 

Yes. Well, we did in this issue, actually. And 
yes we do. Those are valid considerations to 
see what other societies have done. 

Do you recall what other laws you were looking 
at for decisions in this case? 


I don’t offhand, no. 

But you do look. 

But we did look, yes. Historically and 
otherwise, yes. 

A different kind of difficult issue is a case that 
in some respects comes very close to home 
here on the Ninth Circuit because it involved 
a judge in the Northern District of California, 
United States v. Aquilar, and I believe you 
were involved in reviewing that case. Can you 
comment a little about that? 

Yes. I’d be happy to. That was a situation 
in which Judge [Robert] Aguilar had been 
charged with a number of offenses. The 
prosecution believed that he had been 
involved in trying to influence another 
district judge favorably toward a friend of a 
relative of his. He was acquitted of the more 
serious charge that he tried to influence 
the judge. He was convicted of two other 
offenses. One was the disclosure of a wiretap 
that he had knowledge of; the second was 
an obstruction of justice charge. When it 
arrived to our court, our initial panel had 
upheld the one charge, that is the charge 
on the disclosure of a wiretap, and had 
reversed on the obstruction of justice. The 
panel was Judges [Cynthia] Hall, [Diarmuid] 
O’Scannlain, and Hug. Judge Hall wrote 
the majority opinion. I wrote the dissent. 
I thought that it could not be upheld on 
either of the two charges. Judge O’Scannlain 
wrote a concurring and dissenting opinion, 
in which he held that it could be upheld on 
the wiretap charge but could not be upheld 
on the obstruction of justice charge. Then, 
actually all of us on the panel thought the 
case should be taken en banc to resolve the 
matter. 



94 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


Oh really? 

Yes. 

Why is that? 

Well, Judge Hall thought that I was wrong. 
I thought Judge Hall was wrong, [laughter] 
And Judge O’Scannlain was kind of in the 
middle. 

Of two minds, right? 

And so the en banc panel took it up, and 
the en banc panel held nine-to-two that both 
of the charges had to be reversed. I wrote the 
majority opinion, holding that the statutes 
just simply didn’t pertain to the conduct that 
was alleged. 

I guess I’ll have to tell you a little 
background, this is kind of an interesting 
case actually. The genesis of Judge Aguilar’s 
whole problem, really, was the fact that a 
fellow by the name of Chapman had enlisted 
his advice. And I should even go back further 
than that. Judge Aguilar, in reading through, I 
didn’t know Judge Aguilar hardly at all, but in 
reading through the transcripts, which I read 
the whole trial and the prior trial, he was a 
person who had been raised by a mother and 
father who had been immigrant agricultural 
workers. They had five children. They grew 
up in a subterranean little apartment. The 
whole family had helped to support each 
other, some of them selling papers, and they 
all contributed it to the family support. And 
the community kind of helped each other 
there too because they were all poor. And 
his mother’s best friend, her name is slipping 
me right now, but was a neighbor and some 
years later, way later, this fellow, Chapman, 
had married that person who was his mother’s 
best friend. And so he would periodically 


come by and deliver sausages and cookies that 
the neighbor had prepared. He was known 
to Judge Aguilar and, as I looked at it, Judge 
Aguilar was not the kind of guy that could 
just say, “I’m busy, get lost.” He was the kind 
of guy who felt an obligation to help people. 
He helped his Hispanic community, helped 
people get jobs; he’d done a lot of that, aside 
from being a judge. So when this guy came to 
him and said, “You know, I’ve got this friend 
named Tham, who used to be a union leader, 
and was sentenced and served his sentence 
and now he can’t be a union leader any more, 
isn’t there anything that can be done?” And 
Judge Aguilar said, and we as judges shouldn’t 
give legal advice, but he did. But that sure 
happens. It’s pretty hard to kiss somebody 
off when they’ve been part of your family or 
friends or prior client and said, “Yes,” that he 
“should file an action.” 

This Chapman had been a part of the mob, 
and so he had been a bad guy, but he was 
eighty-three years old was the other thing. I 
mean he wasn’t a current threat to anybody, 
but he had a bad criminal career and his 
friend was not an ideal person either. They 
brought by the petition to Judge Aguilar, and 
he said, “Yes it looks good.” Well, Chapman, 
in order to impress his friend, kept saying, 
like in codes, “Yes, I’ve been to see the 
banker.” He called him the banker. The FBI 
was intercepting Tham’s phone, and so they 
were hearing all of this. They were thinking 
this looks really bad for a judge to be doing, 
because Chapman was indicating that Judge 
Aguilar was doing a lot, he would take care 
of this whole thing. Whereas, Judge Aguilar 
was probably thinking here’s this guy I got 
to have him around. I’d get rid of him, but 
I’m not going to do anything other than tell 
him if asked to file a petition and maybe 
suggest appropriate procedure. That’s at least 
the way I looked at it when I looked at his 



Significant Cases 


95 


background. The person he was supposed to 
have influenced, was Judge [Samuel] Weigel. 
And Judge Weigel said, “Absolutely not.” They 
tried to get Judge Weigel to wear a wire, and 
he said, “I certainly won’t.” He testified that 
Judge Aguilar had done nothing to influence 
him. The only thing he had done was ask if 
there was an oral hearing scheduled. But that 
was not influence. So that’s no doubt why the 
jury acquitted him of that charge. 

The charge for the wiretap was based on 
several events. The FBI was concerned about 
Judge Aguilar’s association with Chapman, 
and told Judge [Robert] Peckham this 
doesn’t look good for the court. We don’t 
know if Judge Aguilar knows if this guy had 
a criminal record. Judge Peckham was at an 
ABA meeting and thought he probably should 
warn Judge Aguilar, and he also was not aware 
of any kind of relationship, and he said, “You 
know the FBI tells me that you’ve been seen 
with this Abie Chapman and you know, he 
was a person that years ago that I prosecuted 
when I was a prosecutor. His name had come 
up in connection with a wiretap.” That’s all he 
said about the wiretap. His name came up in 
connection with a wiretap. 

Well, that wiretap that he mentioned had 
expired. This was in August. In February, 
Judge Aguilar answered the door and here 
was Chapman, and he was delivering sausages 
or cookies in a box. He invited him in, and 
Chapman wanted a drink, and he gave him 
a drink. When he was leaving the house, and 
backing out he almost ran into two cars. Judge 
Aguilar, when he was standing on the steps, he 
saw a man over there taking pictures. Then he 
began to be worried that they may be thinking 
something’s going on between Chapman and 
me, especially delivering a box of something 
or other. He began to worry about this. He 
called his nephew, told his nephew that 
Chapman was going on to his sister’s house 


and to warn him that he’d better watch his 
driving, that he almost ran into two cars and 
not to call him anymore; that he had heard 
at work that phones were being tapped. That 
was essentially the warning that he gave to 
his nephew, Steve, to give to Chapman, which 
Steve did give to Chapman that formed the 
basis for that charge. 

Our en banc opinion reversed the 
conviction on both the obstruction of justice 
conviction and the wiretap conviction. 
We held on the wiretap conviction that a 
defendant couldn’t be convicted of disclosing 
a wiretap that had expired six months before. 
The Supreme Court affirmed on the basis of 
the obstruction of justice, and they reversed 
on the basis of the wiretap. They said that 
the intent of the statute was that it could be 
based on a wiretap that had expired. Then it 
was remanded back to us because in our en 
banc opinion we had not found it necessary 
to reach the issue of whether the knowledge 
instruction given was erroneous. The trial 
judge was a very good judge, Judge [Louis] 
Bechtle, who had been brought in from the 
east coast. But he gave an instruction that 
really didn’t correctly state the law as to what 
knowledge was required in order to violate 
the wiretap statute. 

So we had another en banc. Our en banc 
case again, and this time we ruled ten-to-one, 
that this instruction was improper, and if the 
conviction couldn’t be upheld, it could be 
retried, of course, but it couldn’t be upheld. 
Well, during the process of determining 
whether to seek certiorari to the Supreme 
Court and whether to seek a retrial and 
whether Judge Aguilar would resign from the 
bench, an agreement was reached between the 
prosecution and Judge Aguilar that they’d call 
a halt, and he would resign from the bench 
and that they would not prosecute or retry 
that charge. At that time, he had fulfilled 



96 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


the age and service requirements so that in 
resigning he did not lose his lifetime annuity 
benefits. A long and tortuous history of a case. 

Yes, indeed. It sounds to me like you question 
whether there was ever criminal intent there. 

You know, in looking through the whole 
transcript of that, yes, I really did. I thought 
that, I was just seeing a man who had grown 
up in that way helping other people, how 
he got involved, unwisely, very unwisely, to 
get involved with Chapman, but I could see 
how it happened and my own thought about 
the wiretap was that he wasn’t trying to tell 
Chapman to warn him. He was trying to tell 
Chapman, “Stay away from me and don’t call 
me because I think they might be tapping 
my phone.” Now that wouldn’t be a crime, 
certainly when you tell somebody, “Don’t 
call me cause I’m afraid my phone is tapped.” 
And that wouldn’t be a crime. If I were really 
to say what I think happened, that’s what I 
think, when he stood out on that porch, he’s 
thinking, you know, I think maybe they’re 
after me, and they might be tapping my 
phone. They weren’t. 

Kind of a sad, sad story really in many ways, 
isn’t it? 

Yes, it is. It’s a very sad story. It’s an 
indication to me how a judge inadvertently 
can get into trouble. 

Eternal vigilance. 

Yes, that’s right. 

I think that we agreed that we wanted to 
talk about some of the more significant or 
more memorable cases that you have written 
opinions on between about 1997 and 2007. 


One of the first cases I’d like to ask you about 
involved environmental law. It was Friends of 
Pinto Creek v. United States Environmental 
Protection Agency, a recent case from 2007. I 
think you sat on this case with Judge Tashima 
and Judge Gould. Can you tell me the 
circumstances of this case? 

Yes. That was a situation in which one 
of the defendants had wanted to set up a 
copper mine in Arizona, near a creek that 
goes by there. It actually is spoken of as a 
large creek, a small river. The problem that 
was encountered and the reason why the 
Friends of Pinto Creek filed the action is that 
the creek is endangered because it has too 
much copper now going into the creek and 
had been designated by the state, which is 
accepted by the federal government, that it is 
a polluted creek in that respect. So this would 
be adding more copper to a already polluted 
creek. The copper company responds that “we 
are going to decrease the amount of copper 
at a site up above there that would lessen the 
amount of copper that would come into the 
creek.” It still wouldn’t bring the creek into 
compliance and what our opinion says is that 
the design that the Clean Water Act and the 
regulations that have been adopted to enforce 
it require that before adding new pollutants, 
in this case copper, you have to have a plan 
for clearing up the creek, not just lessening 
the amount of copper that’s going to be in the 
creek. 

In essence, that was the matter that was 
argued before us, and our opinion is that in 
order to comply with the Clean Water Act, 
you have to have a plan to clear up the creek, 
and they have no such plan and, therefore, we 
disagreed with the Environmental Protection 
Agency that this complied, and entered a 
preliminary injunction against the company 
proceeding with the copper mine until they 



Significant Cases 


97 


have some sort of method by which eventually 
they would clear up the creek, and that plan 
would have to show how it was going to be 
done. They asked for certiorari to the Supreme 
Court, but did not ask for en banc review. The 
Supreme Court did not take the case. 

Less is not more, is it? Less is not enough. 

That’s right. 

Let me turn to another case—another mining 
case but in a different part of the circuit. This is 
a case that comes out of southeast Alaska, and I 
believe the name of the case is Southeast Alaska 
Conservation Council v. U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers, but this is not a copper mine. 

No, it’s a gold mine. It is a gold mine that 
had originally been designed to take care 
of the tailings and the amount that was dug 
out of the mine as they proceeded to put it 
on a dry land disposal site, which had been 
approved by everybody, including the EPA, 
and it satisfied the people who were the 
plaintiffs in this action. But then the price 
of gold dropped and went down to about 
$400 an ounce and they said, well, it’s not 
going to be economically feasible for us to 
do this. So they designed a system in which 
the slurry that was coming out of the mine 
would be dumped into a nearby lake and it 
would raise the bottom of the lake by fifty 
feet, which would fill up the lake and spread 
the water over a considerably larger area. It 
also was acknowledged that it would kill all 
of the fish and marine life in the lake. 

The representation of the Coeur d’Alene 
Mining Company was, “well that’s alright 
because when we complete the mining in 
ten or more years, we’ll restore it,” and it was 
our opinion that, that was not sufficient-that 
again this was a violation of the Clean Water 
Act; it was clear that it violated one of the 


very regulations, specific regulations that 
said that you cannot dump this sort of slurry 
into a waterway, which they were doing. The 
opinion I wrote entered an injunction against 
them doing so. This case asked for certiorari 
to the Supreme Court, but did not ask for en 
banc review. 

Going straight to the Supreme Court, is that 
common? 

No, usually en banc is requested first. 

One of the criticisms that’s occasionally leveled 
against the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals is 
that the court tends to favor environmentalists 
and environmental points of view. How do you 
respond to that? 

Well, I think that our panel thought it 
was very clear under the regulations and 
the Clean Water Act that this was simply a 
violation; there was no agenda attached to 
it. From our point of view, it was simply a 
violation of the law. 

And those laws apply to everyone across the 
United States. 

Yes. 

They’re not unique to the Ninth Circuit. 
Right. 

Let me turn to another case; different 
subject matter and this involves Indian 
fishing rights. The case was United States v. 
Oregon, Confederated Tribes of the Colville 
Reservation. I think you sat on this case with 
Judges Berzon and Bybee. 

Right. 



98 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


Can you tell me a little bit about this case? 

That’s an interesting case from the 
standpoint of two Indian tribes fighting 
each other over the fishing rights at this 
particular location. Colville Tribes really 
are now representing a tribe that had joined 
as being a part of the Colville Tribes, the 
Wenatchi Tribe. The Wenatchi Tribe had had 
fishing rights at this location for many, many 
years-that’s where they lived, that was their 
source of food, and well being. In the process 
of the federal government rearranging the 
tribal reservations, they had agreed that this 
particular fishing area would be maintained 
and, of course, that would be really to the 
Wenatchi’s benefit. Instead, a new Indian 
agent came in and said, “yes, we’ll reserve 
this reservation,” but instead of it being where 
the Wenatchi had their fishing rights all 
these many years, “it’s going to be up in the 
mountains.” The chief of the Wenatchi said 
that they must believe that the fish swim in 
the mountains. It was clearly a wrong thing. 

Then, eventually they cut another deal 
with the Yakima Tribe, whereby they had 
established a reservation around where the 
Yakima Tribe was and the Wenatchi didn’t 
want to join that. They, of course, wanted 
their fishing rights back where they had 
been for many years. What was involved in 
this suit was the Wenatchis, now represented 
by the Colville Tribe, saying, “look we’re 
entitled to our fishing rights there, we’ve been 
double-dealt here.” That’s what the source of 
the problem was. Interestingly enough, the 
two tribes had fished there, both of them, 
for quite a little while without ever having 
had this serious problem. This case involved 
the Wenatchis being able to fish there-they 
weren’t claiming necessarily that Yakima 
couldn’t fish there-but the Yakima Tribe was 
saying that the Wenatchis couldn’t fish there. 


Anyway, that was the basis of the suit. It was 
our holding that the Wenatchis were entitled 
to fish there. 

Interesting issue and interesting case. If I 
remember correctly, the Wenatchi fishing rights 
go back to well into the 19th Century-1850s or 
so when Isaac Stevens negotiated the treaties 
on behalf of the railroads. 

That’s right. 

Some issues never die. Let me turn to a different 
class of people who bring their cases before the 
court. There was a case that involved a man 
named Erwin Schiff. This was United States v. 
Schiff. Mr. Schiff had a somewhat unique take 
on the Internal Revenue Code. 

Yes, indeed he did. He had quite a 
business going about it. His theory was zero 
income tax-that income tax was voluntary, 
and nobody really had to pay it unless you 
just really wanted to pay it-that you didn’t 
have to have withholding. He had a lot of 
tapes and lectures that he gave on this. He 
also had a book that he either had or was 
going to publish it. It was called The Federal 
Mafia, in which he was saying that the federal 
government was acting like the Mafia in 
taking your money when you didn’t really 
have to pay it. 

This really wasn’t a tax case, was it? 

No, it was a civil case against Schiff for 
promoting a process, which he promoted and 
made a lot of money out of, for avoiding the 
federal income tax. The basis on which he was 
doing it was just completely unfounded. The 
pity of it was with situations like that is that 
it isn’t usually the people like Mr. Schiff, who 
are promoting all of this and making a lot of 



Significant Cases 


99 


money out of doing it that get hurt, it’s the 
people who follow his advice, and then are 
either criminally prosecuted for tax evasion 
or for not filing their income taxes. They 
suffer the burden, not him. That was what 
was before the district court as to whether 
they could stop him from publishing this 
idea and conducting his continuing business- 
misleading everybody. Of course, the counter 
argument was that this was a violation of 
free speech and the First Amendment and 
that he ought to be able to publish what he 
wants and what he thinks about the federal 
tax code. The problem with it is, is that he 
was really advocating and attempting to 
show methods by which the law could be 
avoided-are clearly illegal-and so the district 
court-judge [Lloyd] George, had entered a 
preliminary injunction, which we affirmed 
on appeal. 

Did it end there? 

You know, I have never found out what 
more has happened except that I believe that 
the injunction is still in effect, and I don’t 
think the case has been tried. At least, we 
have never seen it further on appeal. 

It’s never the advocates who really lose out on 
these things; it’s the people who become their 
adherents. 

Yes. 

Another case involving taxation was a case 
coming out of the year 2000 —Desert Citizens 
Against Pollution v. Bisson. Do you recall 
this case? 

Yes, I do. 

Tell me a little bit about this case. 


It actually didn’t involve tax; it involved 
a situation in which the plaintiffs were the 
people who used a particular area of land, 
and were objecting to the fact that land was 
being exchanged for other land that the BLM 
had and that not a fair evaluation was given 
to the land that was going to be acquired by 
this mining company. The problem was that, 
in valuing it, they had used an old assessment, 
in which, in essence, they were saying that 
just this open land is being transferred for 
this other open land, even though it was 
well known at the time of the exchange 
was supposed to take place that the mining 
company was going to use it as a landfill. 
Landfills are much more valuable than just 
open space because you have to get approvals. 
As a matter of fact, they had gotten approval 
for establishing a landfill there before the 
exchange took place, and what our opinion 
said was that in considering the valuation of 
land being transferred, they have to take the 
highest and best use. It was clearly established 
by their having applied and gotten their 
approval that the highest and best use was for 
a landfill. I think the importance of the case 
was that, this, as to how you value land that is 
transferred, and I think it was important that 
we establish that you’ve got to take the highest 
and best use at the time, not some appraisal 
that had been taken a year or so ago. 

So, in essence, the fact that they had already 
applied for the permits obviously demonstrates 
that there is a higher use to the land, but even 
without the permits, you’re suggesting that it 
still had to be valued at its highest possible use. 

Yes, and the fact that even if they hadn’t 
gotten permits, as you say, the fact that this 
1700 acres was right next to the mine, it 
was obvious why they wanted it and what 
they were going to do with it-that should 



100 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


have been reflected in the appraisal of the 
amount to be paid. It’s an interesting case to 
me in another way-in that I had a hard time 
convincing the other two judges on that. One 
at a time I did, eventually they both agreed, 
so I was happy about that. 

Tell me a little bit about that process. How do 
you go about persuading a colleague to your 
point of view? 

Well, it’s really done through memoranda 
because everything we do we submit to the 
other two judges. For example, I don’t call up 
the other judges and say, “look you’re wrong.” 
I submit a memo that goes to both of the other 
two judges. That’s really an important aspect 
as to the way we work so that we don’t have 
individual lobbying and so that everything 
that’s done is made available to everyone 
on the panel. In that case, I had submitted 
memos as to why I felt that, that issue was 
very important, and why I thought that my 
opinion was right. I had to convince one judge 
first, but I also wanted to convince the other 
one and not get a dissent. So I wrote more 
memos pointing out my position and why I 
felt my position was right. I was happy I could 
convince them because I think it establishes 
a very important precedent. 

Well, sticking with the idea about procedure in 
making decisions. After you have heard oral 
argument, several oral arguments in a day, the 
court-the three-judge panel-would retire to a 
conference room and discuss the cases. 

Yes. 

In that process, does it ever happen that you 
change your point of view about a particular 
issue? 


Yes it does because when we go into the 
conference, we have just heard the arguments 
and heard the questions back and forth from 
the judges, oftentimes the questions are kind 
of intended to convince another judge. We 
don’t know going into the conference what 
the position of each judge is, but sometimes 
you can tell by questions, and you will want 
to ask a question that will bring your position 
to the floor. When we get into the conference, 
we discuss it-so sometimes the discussion 
does change our views. I have definitely had 
my view changed a number of times. Just 
listening to the other two judges and how they 
are reasoning it-you go, well, I hadn’t thought 
about it in quite that way. 

I know from reading about the Supreme Court 
that there have been occasions when the justices 
will pass notes back and forth while they’re on 
the bench during oral argument. Now, the one 
instance that comes to mind was it involved 
a baseball score, not a point of law, but does 
that ever happen on the Ninth Circuit where 
the three-judge panel passes comments back 
and forth? 

On some occasions, yes. When Judge 
Chambers was active with our court, he did 
that very frequently 

Oh really? 

Yes. He would even pass a little note about 
a quick summary disposition with the way he 
saw it. 

Interesting. Because the Ninth Circuit covers 
a unique area in the United States, there are 
unique businesses in this part of the country, 
particularly here in the State of Nevada, with 
gaming, casinos, and the like. You heard a case 



Significant Cases 


101 


with your colleagues, Judge [Mary] Schroeder 
and Judge [Melvin] Brunetti that originated in 
the District of Nevada, involving the Venetian 
Casino Resort and a labor union, Venetian 
Casino Resort v. Local Joint Executive Board. 
Tell me a little bit about that case. 

Well, that was a case that involved the 
question of whether the sidewalk in front of 
the Venetian was a public forum where the 
union was within its rights to demonstrate. 
The Venetian claimed that the sidewalk 
was a private sidewalk, whereas the union 
claimed, no, it was a public sidewalk. The 
reason why there was some question about 
it was that when the Venetian was being 
built, the Venetian plan was to take a part 
of the roadway as a turnout area, and, as a 
consequence, that would have left no sidewalk 
to go across. Part of the agreement with the 
state was that they would build a sidewalk 
across what is their property; therefore, it 
was the Venetians position that the sidewalk 
was private. It was the position of the union 
that the sidewalk was not private under the 
agreement with the state, because in order 
to get this accomplished the Venetian was 
to put in a sidewalk that connects on either 
end to the public sidewalk and, then, it 
becomes a public sidewalk. The question was 
whether it was not a public forum because the 
demonstration was on private property. 

It’s an interesting question. Having nothing to 
do with the casino really, except that there was 
an easement of some sort initially. How did the 
court decide? 

Our opinion was that the sidewalk 
was a public sidewalk because it was part 
of the agreement with the state and it was 
connecting to the other two ends of the public 


sidewalk and, therefore, it was a public forum, 
on which the union was entitled to protest. 
Judge Brunetti dissented on the grounds that 
in interpreting the agreement with the state it 
wasn’t a public forum. It was a close case, we 
had a lot of discussions about it, but it was an 
interesting case in that way. 

Of course, your colleague, Judge Brunetti, 
had many years before coming on the court 
been involved in legal matters as a private 
attorney in Las Vegas, in representing casinos 
and the like. Did he bring a particular unique 
experience to the decision in this case? 

Not really. His was a different interpretation 
of the agreement between the Venetian and 
the state. 

Turning to, in some ways, a much more serious 
matter, these are cases that you had that 
involved habeas corpus, death penalty. One of 
the ones comes from 2001, a man named David 
Murdishaw, who was a convicted felon serving 
time in San Quentin on death row. You heard 
this case with Judges [Warren] Ferguson and 
[Kim] Wardlaw. Murdishaw v. United States. 
Would you like to speak to that? 

That was a case in which the essence of 
it was whether an instruction that was given 
under a 1978 provision of California law, was 
correct because the law had been enacted after 
the time of the charge for murder. Under the 
1977 provision, which he maintained should 
be applicable, gave more discretion to the jury 
to evaluate whether the aggravating factors or 
the mitigating factors appropriately led to the 
death penalty finding. In the 1977 provision, it 
was quite clear that they were to be evaluated 
against each other. In the 1978 provision, 
the wording of it was such that if you found 



102 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


aggravating factors, there was a question 
whether you really had to go further than 
that. We held that the instruction under the 
1978 law was error because in evaluating the 
sentence, we really had to look at the standard 
for the 1977 statute because that was the one 
applicable to his case. We affirmed the guilt 
phase, but held the penalty phase had to be 
reevaluated and we granted the habeas relief 
and sent it back to the district court. 

Do many of these habeas corpus cases end up 
in en banc hearings? 

Yes. This one didn’t however. 

There was a case from 1998 —Thompson v. 
Calderon— which I think did end up in en 
banc review. 

Yes, and that was, in my opinion, a very 
sad case because there had been a problem 
that occurred with regard to the procedures 
so that the time for en banc passed before 
en banc was requested. It was because of a 
misunderstanding with memos back and 
forth and so forth. We held that the mandate, 
which had issued, should be recalled so that 
the en banc court could consider the issues 
that those of us who thought that the panel 
decision was wrong could be considered. In 
my mind, and a number of the judges of our 
court, it was a serious question of whether the 
wrong guy had been the one who had been 
involved in the murder. Two persons did some 
things together, but it was not clear at all in 
my mind that Thompson was the one who had 
raped and murdered the victim or whether it 
was the other guy. That’s the reason a lot of 
us wanted to have en banc consideration. The 
reason why I say it is unfortunate is that our 
decision was appealed to the Supreme Court, 
and the Supreme Court, in a 5-to-4 decision, 


held that it was an abuse of discretion to recall 
the mandate—that once it had issued and en 
banc hadn’t been requested and that it took 
some very serious consequences to recall it. 

Do you recall who authored the Supreme Court 
decision? 

Yes. It was authored by Justice [Anthony] 
Kennedy, and Justice Kennedy had said, in 
strong terms, that this recalling of the mandate 
in order to take it back and hear it en banc was 
a “grave abuse of discretion.” That got played 
up a whole lot in the newspapers about the 
Ninth Circuit not only is reversed, but they 
committed a grave abuse of discretion. 

Them’s fighting words. 

I think I was telling you that I had a good 
relationship with Justice Kennedy when he 
was on our court, and I used to kid him 
sometimes about his strong language. I have 
a picture with Justice Kennedy and his wife, 
Mary, and Barbara and I, and I had a copy 
made of that picture, and then I blanked him 
out of the picture, and I said that I had to do 
that for 120 days because of the fact that he 
said that this was a grave abuse of discretion 
when four of his colleagues found that there 
was no abuse of discretion at all. Not sure how 
he took that. 

I see. [laughter] 

My clerk said you’re not going to really 
send that are you? I said, oh yeah, he knows 
that I kid him about this stuff. 

Well, I know your relationship with him goes 
way back because I recall you telling me many 
years ago when we first started these interviews 
that when you first came on the bench Judge 



Significant Cases 


103 


Kennedy was helpful to you in setting up your 
chambers. You went down to Sacramento to 
visit with him and so you have a long, long 
relationship. 

He was very helpful. He helped me 
get the clerks because I was appointed and 
confirmed in September; I was out of the 
normal sequence for hiring new law clerks so 
he helped me with getting law clerks, helped 
me with how chambers are organized, and 
told me that I didn’t have to move to San 
Francisco. 

Well, of course, these death penalty cases are a 
very serious matter and this has got to be one 
of the most difficult things that any judge has 
to deal with, it seems to me. You had another 
case where the defendant was a man named 
Stanley Williams (no relation to me). He was 
a defendant, sentenced to death, had filed a 
habeas petition with the court of appeals, and 
Judge [Ronald] Gould and Judge T.G. Nelson 
sat with you on this case in 2004. Williams v. 
Woodford. 

Yes. That’s a sad case to me, because it’s a 
situation where the basic issue was whether 
there was ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Often times there has been ineffective 
assistance of counsel in these cases because 
the person who was appointed didn’t have 
any experience with death penalty cases and 
made some mistakes that shouldn’t have been 
made. In this situation, that was not the case. 
This was a very experienced attorney who did 
a very good job. Actually, his community had 
awarded him as Attorney of the Year. So it was 
not a person who through inexperience made 
mistakes; he tried the case very well, with the 
law as it was at that time. I could really find 
no fault with the way he had represented his 
client, and there was a whole lot of evidence 


that the murder had actually taken place and 
the circumstances that had taken place and 
so forth, and there really wasn’t much you 
could ever find fault with what was done. 
From that standpoint, it had to be affirmed 
and why I say it’s sad is because he’d been on 
death row for twenty years. He was a guy who 
had been one of the founders of the Crips 
gang in Los Angeles. He had a lot of bad 
things in his background, and I’m sure that’s 
what the trial attorney was worried about of 
trying the case in a way so that those things 
didn’t come out, but as part of that gang, he 
had done some very bad things. The situation 
was that after he had been in prison for a 
while, he did a lot to discourage young people 
from joining gangs, and there were some 
organizations who had utilized his testimony 
and writings, and several occasions, he would 
be telephoned into a gathering to say that this 
is a terrible mistake to join these gangs-look 
at what’s happened to me-you shouldn’t do 
it. Interestingly enough, I hadn’t realized that 
there’s apparently a Crips gang in other areas 
of the world-there’s one in Switzerland, and 
a legislator in Switzerland had nominated 
him for the Nobel Peace Prize, which is an 
unusual thing for a person that’s serving a 
death sentence on death row to be nominated 
for a Nobel Peace Prize. That occurred, 
along with some of the organizations that 
appreciated what he had done to try to 
discourage gang activity, showing that he had 
really rehabilitated himself; if you’re going to 
count what happens in prison with regard to 
people rehabilitating them, he was a prime 
example. At the end of that opinion, which 
had affirmed the death sentence, I added a 
paragraph, saying that this was a situation 
where the conviction and sentence would 
have to stand but that it would be certainly 
a likely possibility for clemency from the 
governor, either as a pardon or a commutation 



104 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


of the sentence, thinking mostly commutation 
of the sentence would make sense. I was 
hoping that I might have some influence-it 
did not. His sentence was not commuted, and 
he was executed. I felt bad about that because 
a person who has rehabilitated himself to 
the extent he had seemed worthy to have 
commutation. 

A difficult case. There had been a number of calls 
from high places for reform of habeas review 
and for changing how death penalty cases are 
handled in fact I think one of your colleagues 
on the court of appeals, Judge [Arthur] Alarcon, 
recently made some proposals to the State of 
California. Do you have some opinions about 
habeas reform? 

Well, I haven’t really thought about that 
as deeply as apparently Judge Alarcon has. I 
would think that one thing that’s a problem 
is that it is so expensive, particularly in death 
penalty cases, where it takes a lot of funds 
for the investigation and for the attorneys 
involved because they have a very serious 
job to do to defend somebody whose life is in 
their hands. One of the things that I actually 
worked on with Judge Alarcon was to get 
some sort of a budget established so that the 
attorney presents a sort of thing that he feels is 
necessary to do and the money that’s involved, 
and I think that’s a good idea. For one thing, 
the attorney will never feel that he’s done his 
job unless he exhausts every possibility, so 
getting the judge to consider whether what 
he proposes is going to lead to anything is 
a good thing-it kind of lets him off of the 
hook too. I think that’s one thing is a good 
resolution. The other thing that appeals to me 
in death penalty cases is the fact that I really 
have serious doubts that the death penalty is 
worth it. 


How do you mean that? 

Well, I think that those states that have 
life in prison without parole as the top 
punishment—in our circuit it’s Hawaii and 
Alaska—they don’t have any increases in 
murder or anything as a result of that. The 
case is closed when that sentence is invoked; 
the victims’ families are not waiting for years 
to have a closure of whatever occurred. I think 
there obviously will be some habeas matters, 
but they’re not going to be extended to the 
extent that the death penalty ones are My 
feeling is that life without parole is a serious 
punishment, doesn’t release a dangerous 
person back into society and it gives closure 
to the families of the victims. Then, of course, 
there’s the worry, as we are seeing now, where 
people have been wrongfully convicted-as 
DNA shows-when you have life without the 
possibility of parole, you can correct mistakes 
like that and in executing the person you 
cannot. 

That’s very interesting. Let me turn to some 
lighter cases. 

Good. 

Because of where the Ninth Circuit is, there are 
celebrities in the Ninth Circuit, I guess there are 
celebrities just about everywhere these days, 
but the Ninth Circuit seems to be particularly 
rich in celebrities and celebrity cases, although 
most of them do not end up in federal court, 
thank goodness. But there was a case from 
2001, involving some surfers and a clothing 
retailer, Abercrombie & Fitch. Downing v. 
Abercrombie. Do you recall this case? 

Yes, I do. The surfers were objecting to 
using, without their permission or any sort 



Significant Cases 


105 


of compensation, some of the pictures of the 
things that they had done surfing were being 
used to benefit Abercrombie & Fitch. The 
surfers sued to enjoin it, and I suppose their 
idea was that if you’re going to use it, then we 
should be paid for it. We held that they should 
be paid for it. 

There’s another case, coming from an earlier 
time-a few years before that-1998, which 
involved a brewery, Coors, out of Colorado and 
a former baseball player, DonNewcombe, who 
pitched for the Dodgers. What were the issues 
in Mr. Newcombe’s case? 

Yes. That was interesting to me because 
when I looked up from oral argument, I 
saw Don Newcombe out there watching the 
proceedings. The issue there was that they 
had used, not a photograph, but a portrayal 
of what was very similar to his unique style 
of pitching. He lifted his leg a lot higher 
than some did and the cap he was wearing- 
anyone familiar with baseball would have 
really recognized that it was him they were 
portraying. Once again, he was saying they’re 
using my image without my permission and 
that he needed compensation. We found for 
Don Newcombe. 

Well, as a life-long Dodger fan, I’m really 
pleased to hear that, [laughter] 

You probably would recognize his 
pitching style. 

He was through pitching by the time I became 
aware of the Dodgers-I really didn’t follow the 
Dodgers until they moved to Los Angeles, and 
his pitching days were pretty much over by 
then. I know he is still alive and still employed 
by the club, as one of the Dodger greats. That’s 


not to say anything about the brewery-Coors 
is a fine brewing company too. 

Coors probably thought it was all right 
since they didn’t use his picture. When 
pointing it out, it was pretty clear they were 
modeling the portrayal after Don Newcombe. 

OK, so when you get a case like this you’re 
dealing with the legal issues and the merits-so 
in some ways it’s a different matter altogether. 
We’ve talked about this afternoon a lot of cases 
you have written opinions for in the last ten 
years or so. Is there any case that you can recall 
that we’ve overlooked? 

I think we have gotten most of the cases 
that I would identify. 

Good, good. 

There are a lot of opinions; I was surprised 
when you furnished me a list and I was going 
through them I didn’t realize that there were 
that many that I had written. 

You are a prolific opinion writer. But every 
judge on the Ninth Circuit carries an enormous 
caseload. It’s extraordinary. 

Yes. 




14 

The Chief Judgeship 


I owe you congratulations for becoming Chief 
Judge of the Ninth Circuit. 

Oh, well, thank you very much. 

It occurs to me that maybe I ought to ask you 
a little bit about being chief judge or how one 
becomes chief judge. How does that come 
about? 

Well, it’s actually a matter of seniority The 
statute provides that the person who is the most 
senior judge and under age sixty-five becomes 
the chief judge. And you can accept the chief 
judgeship anytime before sixty-five, and if you 
do, you can serve until you’re seventy. There 
is also a time limitation on being a chief judge 
that is seven years in the event that the earlier 
time doesn’t cut you off. So it’s seventy or seven 
years whichever is first. 

Has it always been like that? 

No. That was changed in the middle 
of Chief Judge Browning’s term. He was 


grandfathered in, so he served thirteen years. 
Immediately prior to him was Chief Judge 
Chambers, and he served for seventeen 
years. 

Has there ever been a chief judge to your 
knowledge who served longer than Judge 
Chambers? 

That’s the longest I know of. 

I would think if one were to serve seven years — 
that ought to be plenty of time. 

That’s plenty of time. 

It’s a big responsibility, I know, and I think the 
circuit is in excellent hands with you at the 
helm. 

Well, thank you. 

Tell me about your investiture ceremony, which, 
for me, was quite a unique ceremony, and it 



108 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


obviously held some meaning for you. Tell me 
how that came about. 

Well, actually, my former law clerks 
arranged it. The idea of it was to have local 
participation, in the fact that I was actually 
the first [Ninth Circuit] chief judge to come 
from Nevada and so it was a very nice affair. 
A lot of our judges were in attendance, and 
a number of my former clerks spoke and 
others. We had a very good singing group 
too that participated. There was quite a large 
attendance from this community and it was 
very nice to see all of them. 

It had to have been held in a large place, wasn’t 
it? 

Yes, it was held in the Lawlor Events 
Center, which is the basketball pavilion. 

At the university? 

Yes. 

That was a wonderful occasion, it really was. 
As I recall Senator Reid was there, and I think 
he spoke? 

Yes. 

For you personally, what sort of challenges 
have you faced in your first few months as 
chief judge? 

Well, one of the first challenges was the 
immediacy of the circuit split legislation. I 
assumed the office on March 1st and right 
about that time, the circuit split bill had just 
passed the committee, which would have split 
the circuit. The nine western states would have 
been split in this way—that California and 
Hawaii would have been the remaining Ninth 


Circuit and the other seven states would have 
been the new, what we affectionately refer to 
as the “String Bean” circuit. When initially 
it was introduced, Bill SB 956, it would have 
split off the five northern states, Alaska, 
Washington, Oregon, Idaho and Montana. 
But that was not going to pass the committee 
so they added Arizona and Nevada to it with 
the idea of obtaining Senator Kyi’s vote and by 
putting the headquarters of the new Twelfth 
Circuit in Phoenix. 

I’m sure this is an issue that will come back in 
the future. 

I’m sure it is, too. 

This doesn’t want to go away. Have there been 
other challenges that you’ve had to face as chief 
judge in your first few months? 

Well, let me tell you about that challenge. 
I related this to you briefly in an earlier 
interview. You might be interested in details 
of what happened. I flew back to Washington 
right away, and I sent out an all-points 
bulletin to all of the judges to write to their 
Congressmen, which they did. A lot of the 
judges wrote, and we mobilized some effort on 
the part of the bar. We had a lot of resolutions 
that—a lot of work had been done before this 
too—but the one, why I was most interested 
in getting all the judges to write, and a lot 
of them really, a lot of them did, and that 
helped a lot, but Judge [James] Browning and 
I went back to Congress to do what we could 
to avoid this bill from passing the Senate. 
And we were at that time concerned with 
obtaining at least forty-one votes so that it 
could be filibustered and it would have to be 
broken. Senator [Conrad] Burns then had the 
bill attached to the appropriations bill and 
this was interesting in this way. We had been 



The Chief Judgeship 


109 


working with Senator [Dianne] Feinstein 
and Senator [Harry] Reid, and we had seen 
about twenty-five senators or their staff, and 
we had quite a lot of support. We would have 
been able to sustain the filibuster, and I think 
it would have been defeated, but Senator 
Burns had asked for unanimous consent to 
substitute or to amend his bill to provide 
for the commission that Senator Feinstein 
had requested. The commission would study 
the circuit split, the structure of the circuits 
throughout the nation for two years and then 
report to Congress, and we were very happy 
that was the case. Judge Browning and I went 
down to the commissary there and celebrated 
with a glass of orange juice only to find out 
we got a call back very shortly that, indeed, 
this had been amended. There is some sort 
of a secondary amendment process. This bill 
that had received the unanimous consent to 
be introduced could be amended without 
unanimous consent, and the amendment was 
to split the Ninth Circuit. So, in other words, 
we had the bill to have this committee study 
the structure, but there is an amendment to it 
in the meantime to split the Ninth Circuit. This 
was attached to the continuing appropriations 
bill. This could not be filibustered, and since 
it couldn’t be filibustered, it was now fifty-one 
votes is all it would take to pass, so we were 
very concerned. 

Then, the next thing that happened was 
that Senator Feinstein and Senator Reid had 
said this was a non-germane amendment, and 
it should be struck for that reason, and the 
parliamentarian ruled it was non-germane, 
and there was a failure to appeal that ruling 
from the chair so Senator Reid called us, 
we were there and available in one of the 
rooms of his office, and said, we can beat it 
because it wasn’t appealed. We were about to 
celebrate again and then we found, no, there 
was another ability to amend by the person 


who was in charge of the appropriations bill, 
Senator [Mark] Hatfield, and he felt sorry 
for Senator Burns that he had not been 
procedurally alert. In fact, he was sitting in the 
chair at the time—he was chairing the Senate 
at the time—which was really interesting. 
We saw the thing on TV. Hatfield provided 
another amendment so now it was about 
to go through as an amendment to split the 
Ninth Circuit in the meantime. Well, then 
Senator Reid and Senator Feinstein were 
very upset saying this was a complete misuse 
of the unanimous consent process. It was a 
trick, really, to get unanimous consent to a 
commission that everybody wanted on our 
side and then to have this other amendment 
to it. And so the leadership of both parties 
became very concerned because both Senator 
Feinstein and Senator Reid made speeches 
from the floor that if this is the way the 
unanimous consent procedure is going to be 
used there are going to be no more unanimous 
consents this session. 

Then, they got very concerned, as a result 
of that they struck a compromise to amend the 
bill to create a commission. It was to report 
in one year, and the commission was to be by 
three named by the Senate, three named by 
the House, three named by the Chief Justice, 
and three named by the President. Well, they 
cut it down to two named by the President so 
that was the compromise, one year reporting 
and only two by the President. That was 
sent over to the House. Well, Congressman 
[Carlos] Morehead, who was chairman of the 
key subcommittee, was opposed to having a 
commission that was only to report in this 
short of time, because it was obvious that a 
legitimate study could not be done in that 
time. So he didn’t do much on the bill. As 
we got closer to the time that the Senate was 
going to adjourn, all the ex-chief judges and 
I signed a letter saying that we would really 



110 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


like to have the commission because we felt 
that was a way we would really get a legitimate 
study of the entire thing, addressing some 
of these concerns that I’ve just expressed 
to you earlier, and I went back and sat in 
Congressman Morehead’s office with his staff, 
and they were very nice, very cooperative. He 
called Senator Burns and he said, “You know, 
if you’ll agree to two years and the three for 
the President so that it’s evened out, we’ll 
process the bill.” 

In the process in those last hours of the 
session, there had been a lot of things attached 
to that appropriations bill and those persons 
who were concerned, the appropriations 
chairman of each of the committees, I think 
just figured, if we’re ever going to get this 
through we have to just eliminate all the 
extraneous things that don’t really pertain 
to the appropriations. So this was one of the 
things that got eliminated. And so that’s why 
there is now no commission legislation. 

Ah ha. So there is no commission. 

There is no commission. 

I didn’t realize that. 

I related all this to you, because this may 
be the only place where that story is going to 
ever be known, [laughter] 

Well, that’s very important for us to have, I 
think. It’s a byzantine story, and I’ve heard 
pieces of it before but never on one long 
explanation from a key participant. What do 
you think is driving Senator Burns to do this? Is 
he really thinking that this is going to improve 
the administration of justice? 

Well, it’d be hard for me to say. I think that 
there is a perception perhaps with Senator 
Burns and Senator [Slade] Gorton from 


Washington, who is also very key in this, 
that liberal California judges are making bad 
rulings on environmental issues. That was 
initially the reason expressed in the newspaper. 
After that, that reason was downplayed and 
was made to be that it would be more efficient, 
and it’s too large. But if you really want my 
view as to what’s driving it, it’s that. I think 
that a lot of the supporters of the two senators 
are very upset with environmental rulings 
in general. What’s really odd about it is the 
“liberal California judges.” There are really 
more Republican appointees in California 
than there are Democrats and some of the key 
decisions, like the spotted owl decision, was 
written by Judge [Alfred] Goodwin, who is a 
long time Oregonian. 

And a fairly staunch Republican as well. 

Oh, yes, that’s right. The perception is 
really wrong, very, very wrong, and it is not 
fair with regard to the administration of 
justice either because our circuit has been 
not only a very collegial circuit, but it’s been 
innovative in so many ways. When I was back 
at the Administrative Office [of the Courts], 
they have an orientation session for new chief 
judges, and I was just struck by the fact that 
various department heads would come in 
and talk about things, and they’d talk about 
what was going on in the country and what 
they were doing and four or five times they 
would say, “Well, that’s like the program 
that was initiated in the Ninth Circuit.” That 
sort of impressed me, and that’s really true. I 
know that Judge [William] Schwarzer from 
the Federal Judicial Center said that too, that 
when he got to studying into it he realized 
how much really the Ninth Circuit had done 
as far as innovation. 

It’s these innovative westerners again. 



The Chief Judgeship 


111 


That’s right. 

So you see, in many respects, you see regional 
differences in the judiciary throughout the 
United States? 

Yes, there are. We’re all charged with 
enforcing the national law, and I think 
we’re conscious of the other rulings that are 
made elsewhere. You know it’s probably five 
percent of the cases where there is some real 
difference, but they’re the ones that are kind 
of cutting edge cases and get the publicity. 

Sure, well when you think of how many cases 
there are just in the Ninth Circuit. For example 
I think, andFve heard [Clerk of Court] Cathy 
Catterson, well at that session where you spoke 
in San Francisco, that there was some eighty- 
four to eighty-five hundred. 

That’s right, yes—active cases in the Ninth 
Circuit. And then to think there are just a 
handful of these that are ones that people get 
worked up over. That’s right. 




15 


Changes in the Ninth Circuit 


You served as chief judge during a period 
of extraordinary circumstances, I think, in 
the Ninth Circuit. Among the broad things 
that happened during your tenure: there was 
tremendous caseload growth, both at the 
court of appeals and the district courts, there 
were extraordinary vacancies on the court of 
appeals, which presented significant issues, and 
then, of course, there were several attempts to 
split the circuit into at least two circuits. And, 
I think, we want to go into some detail about 
each of those things. Let’s start with the matter 
of case filings. My research indicates that case 
filings in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals 
during this period between 1996 and 2000, rose 
from something like 8500 to 10,000 per year? 

Yes. 

And in the district court level there was an 
increase of some 29-to-30 percent and an 
increase in case filings of about 48,000 to some 
59,000. Can you speak a little bit about what 
was happeningfirst at the court of appeals and 


then maybe at the district court level about the 
causes for this caseload increase and then how 
it was managed? 

Well, one of the problems was that 
Congress was identifying more crimes 
as federal offenses. We, of course, had an 
increase in the immigration cases. Aside 
from that, it was the fact that the population 
had grown and there were new statutes 
from Congress that were being adjudicated. 
How did we handle it? Well, we had a hard 
problem at the beginning of my tenure 
because we had so many vacancies. At one 
point, we were ten judges down. Eventually, 
we were getting them filled, but I know that in 
speeches that I was giving around the circuit 
was to encourage some pressure to get the 
vacancies filled because it was taking a long 
time for them to be confirmed by the Senate. 
Some of our judges took four years for their 
confirmation. 

That’s a long time. 



114 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


William Fletcher and Richard Paez, I 
know, each took about four years before there 
was a confirmation. 

During this period when there were so 
many vacancies on the court of appeals, 
administratively, how did the court handle 
distributing the caseload? 

Well, all our judges were extremely busy 
during that time. The senior judges were most 
helpful in handling the increased caseloads. 
We brought in visiting judges from other 
circuits, and we brought in a lot of our district 
judges to fill out part of the panels so that we 
could try to keep as many panels hearing cases 
as we could. 

How is that managed, the visiting judge 
procedure, or is it managed locally by the court 
of appeals in the clerk’s office ? 

It’s really managed locally, except that 
the transfers from other circuits have to be 
approved by the Administrative Office, in fact, 
by the Chief Justice [of the United States]. 

Oh, the Chief Justice gets involved in that; that’s 
interesting. 

But generally, it’s very easy to get their 
approval, especially when it’s a circuit that 
needs a lot of help, like the Ninth Circuit. 

I would imagine so. Did you take an active roll 
in helping to advance the confirmation process 
forjudges who had been nominated but were 
having difficulty getting confirmed? 

Yes, from that standpoint, I certainly got 
the assistance from the senators from Nevada 
and encouraged all of the judges and the bar 
to notify the senators in their states that there 


was really a dire need to have those vacancies 
filled. I think that helped a lot. 

Did the Lawyer Representative Coordinating 
Committee have a role in that? 

It did. They were very good about 
that-a very big help. Also, some of the bar 
associations in the states were too. 

You took over as chief judge from Judge [Clifford] 
Wallace. Talk to me if you would a little bit 
about the transition from Judge Wallace’s 
administration to your administration. 

Judge Wallace was a very easy person to 
follow because he was so well organized, and he 
was so conscious about court administration 
that a lot of things that he had started or had 
accomplished were a great help to me. Judge 
Wallace wanted to stick with the tried and true 
CCI system because of its email capabilities 
to the wide range of judges throughout the 
Ninth Circuit; however, when I took over, 
it was time to bring the circuit into the 21st 
Century and update our computers to PCs 
like the other circuits were doing. Of course, 
that transition has been very successful, and 
we haven’t looked back since. 

So there was a regular simple transition from 
his administration to yours. How would you 
describe your administrative style? 

I think what I was probably most conscious 
of was to keep a very good tone among our 
judicial family, the circuit court of appeals, 
as far as continuing what Judge Browning 
really had started-a very collegial circuit that 
had been maintained throughout his tenure. 
I thought that was one thing that was very 
important, because I had seen a lot of courts 
torn apart by antagonism among the judges, 



Changes in the Ninth Circuit 


115 


and I was quite intent on assuring that didn’t 
happen. Lots of times with our new forms of 
communication, such as email, it’s easier to 
send something out without thinking how 
it sounds to the reader or without the buffer 
of a secretary using discretion to hold it and 
have the sender review it a second time before 
sending. One of the things during my tenure 
that I tried to do was to diffuse a lot of that 
with humor when the emails got a little too 
sharp, I’d try to kid them out of it. That worked 
very well actually. 

In addition to maintaining the collegial 
atmosphere in the Ninth Circuit, did you have 
other goals when you became chief judge? 

Yes, one of the goals was to continue to 
make the production that we got from the 
staff attorneys continually improving. One 
of the things that had happened earlier was 
that we had a practice that I never liked-we 
would bring in a supervisor from an academic 
institution to be the director of the staff 
attorneys for two years. Well, the first year 
would kind of be adjusting to what our court 
was doing and what the staff was doing; then, 
the second year, they were getting ready to 
leave. So that didn’t work. 

One of the big changes that started during 
Chief Judge Wallace’s administration, but I 
think was largely due to Cathy Catterson, 
when she appointed one of her deputies to 
be in charge of the Staff Attorney’s Office- 
that’s Molly Dwyer. From that point on, the 
production in the Staff Attorney’s Office 
started improving a great deal. The program 
of orally hearing screening cases started 
when Chief Judge Goodwin appointed a 
committee that I chaired with Judge [Mary] 
Schroeder and Judge [Edward] Leavy. We 
had thought that it could be worked out 
that the staff attorneys could present to 


three judges the cases that were relatively 
straightforward and easily decided because 
they were governed by existing precedent or 
there was no jurisdiction-that sort of thing. 
The court was a little bit skeptical about that 
whole approach so we tried it for a year-Judge 
Schroeder, Judge Leavy, and I—in trying that 
out and showing the rest of the court how 
that worked, that program was then started. 
However, as I was mentioning, without the 
continuing leadership in the Staff Attorney’s 
Office we were having a hard time getting 
the number of cases that we had felt could be 
done, accomplished. The thing that helped a 
great deal, as I say, was when Molly Dwyer 
took charge. We were trying desperately to 
get a goal of sixty cases per month decided 
that way and never really reached it until she 
got in charge. Now we are getting about 150 
or more cases decided per month in that way. 
The screening process takes a great deal of 
pressure off of the court and the merit panels 
because those cases can be resolved without 
all the formality of oral argument. 

I do note, however, that one of the 
important phases of that is the fact that if any 
one of the three judges feels that this is a case 
that deserves more attention, then that case 
will be kicked off by the one judge to a merits 
panel. That happens with maybe ten to twenty 
cases in a month’s screening session. 

Talk a little bit, if you will, about the process of 
this screening program what the staff attorneys 
do. Do they brief the cases? 

The staff attorney that’s in charge of 
the particular case naturally reads all of 
the briefs, all the materials, comes to the 
three-judge panel completely prepared to 
answer any questions that the judges might 
have and usually with a proposed brief 
memorandum disposition. One of the things 



116 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


that impresses me with the staff is that they 
take it very seriously when they are going 
to give a presentation to three judges-it’s a 
little bit intimidating I think-and so they are 
extremely well prepared so that when a judge 
says, “I’d like to see that affidavit.” They have 
it right there. Or, “what is that portion of the 
brief that discusses that?” They have it right in 
front of them. This type of preparation gives 
us a lot of confidence in the thoroughness of 
their examination and then the fail-safe is that 
if the judges feel that there really is more to 
this case than just a screening case, then one 
judge can kick it to a merits panel. 

Is there any ranking of cases? That one case has 
a higher priority than another or something of 
that sort? 

Yes, we used to rank our cases-1, 3, 
5, 7, and 10. The “1” cases now are all I’m 
discussing-the “1” weighted cases. It seems 
to all of us now that the cases we hear at oral 
argument are a lot harder than they used to 
be and that’s because the screening cases have 
been taken off, and they were all the easy ones. 
When we would get a panel of cases, there 
were usually two or three that would be pretty 
easy cases. Well, those have been pretty much 
taken off at screening. Generally, the 3s, 5s, 7s, 
and 10s are pretty hard cases that are heard 
on oral argument. 

Are many of these cases that are screened for 
relatively simple disposition pro se cases? 

Yes, quite a few of them are. Lots of 
times it’s a prisoner that feels he should 
have some additional matter discussed and 
sometimes that’s true. When there is a pro 
se case that we feel has some potential merit, 
and we feel that it should be considered by a 
regular merits panel, usually we will have a 


pro hono counsel appointed to argue it and 
prepare a brief on it. We have a particular 
staff attorney that governs that program, 
and she does a very good job. Susan Gelmis, 
who is the staff member responsible. She has 
developed through some of the law schools 
and otherwise a pro hono program so that 
these people can be appointed as counsel. 
They are guaranteed when they are appointed 
that we will hear it in oral argument. 

That’s good; that must encourage them then. 

Yes. 

In addition to maintaining a collegial 
atmosphere and assuring the increased review 
of cases by staff attorneys, did you have other 
goals? 

Well, when I first came on, the hottest 
topic, and one that consumed a great deal of 
my attention, was all the attempts to split the 
circuit. So, one of my major goals was to keep 
the circuit from being split; a second goal was 
to fill the vacancies; and a third goal, I suppose, 
was to keep the circuit running smoothly. I 
also felt that we had to pay considerable 
attention to the problems of the district court, 
both with regard to construction of facilities 
and increased caseload. Also, if they were 
overloaded because of a lack of appointment 
of judges, I felt it very important to assure that 
we were paying adequate attention to those 
needs of the district judges, including the 
bankruptcy judges and the magistrate judges. 

In the mid-90s, the District of Nevada received 
two additional Article III judgeships. Did that 
happen on your tenure or was that before? 

I think it was on my tenure. We had been 
asking for them for quite awhile. 



Changes in the Ninth Circuit 


117 


I know it wasn’t a simple process, and it wasn’t 
a short, brief process, these things never are; 
and, of course, when new judgeships are 
considered for one district, Congress has a 
way of wanting to consider new judgeships for 
another district, and then another district, and 
pretty soon we’re talking about an omnibus 
bill aren’t we? 

Well, actually, that’s the way the judgeships 
are generally appointed. Is that there’s a 
Judicial Resources Committee, which is 
part of the U.S. Judicial Conference and is 
the committee that recommends the new 
judgeships. They take into account the cases 
per judge that each of the districts or the 
circuits courts of appeal have and try to be 
fair about allocating the new judgeships on 
the same basis for all of the districts and all 
of the circuits. That’s what normally goes to 
the Congress is this judgeship bill that’s been 
approved by the Resources Committee and, 
in turn, by the U.S. Judicial Conference. It’s 
rare that there are judgeships appointed that 
are outside of that recommendation. 

Of course, as chief judge, you had a role in the 
U.S. Judicial Conference, didn’t you? 

Yes. 

Tell me a little bit about that. 

Well, a lot of the U.S. Judicial Conference 
is run by the committees so that when we 
come to the actual meeting of the conference, 
which is held twice a year, we are really 
considering the recommendations of the 
committees. They do a lot of good work-like 
I just mentioned the Judicial Resources—but 
there are committees on fiscal planning, 
security, ethics, and all of those various areas. 
When I was there, Chief Justice Rehnquist 


was presiding, as the chief justice always does 
over the U.S. Judicial Conference meeting. 
He presided very much in accordance with 
Roberts Rules of Order, [laughter] 

This was notan informal proceeding, [laughter] 

No, it was not. [laughter] It was also 
very important that everyone get there on 
time, or the person who didn’t would be 
very embarrassed. All the questions were 
addressed to the chair-there was very strict 
compliance with Robert’s Rules of Order. 

What committees did you serve on for the U.S. 
Judicial Conference? 

I served two terms on the Judicial 
Resources Committee, which was a very 
important committee for us because it was 
determining the number of judgeships to be 
allocated for each circuit. The hardest one 
was the court of appeals—there was some 
resistance because there was a general view 
that the Ninth Circuit was too big. I was able 
to get through the request for the additional 
judgeships we needed, although they never 
really got many of them finally approved by 
Congress. We got them through the Judicial 
Conference at least. 

Did you have a choice of this committee 
assignment or did the chief justice just decide 
that this is where you belonged? 

I did request that one, but the chief justice 
ultimately makes the decisions. 

Sure, but he obviously takes into consideration 
the individual’s interests and desires of what 
committee he or she wants to serve on. 

Yes, exactly. 



118 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


Was there any preparation between you and 
Chief Judge Wallace prior to you becoming chief 
judge? For you to assume this role? Did you ever 
run the circuit conference or anything like that? 

I had run the circuit conference, yes. I had 
been the chairman of the circuit conference, 
and I had been on the Ninth Circuit Judicial 
Council, the Executive Committee, and I had 
been in most of those positions earlier so, in 
that way, I was prepared. 

Did your successor have a similar experience? 

Yes. I made sure Judge Schroeder similarly 
was on those various committees and had the 
same kind of an opportunity to be fully aware 
of the administration of the courts. I think 
that is important because it’s known for some 
period of time before whose going to be the 
next chief judge. I think all have made it a 
point so that the next person is well equipped. 

That’s good. I think that must contribute to 
the collegial atmosphere? As well as make for 
a smooth transition from one chief judge to 
the next? 

It does. 

A student of the court once said that the chief 
judge is the principal point of contact for 
every concern, suggestion, complaint, and 
request. Another has said that the chief judge 
is the lightning rod for kooks. Maybe that’s 
overstating it, but did you find that in your 
situation-that you get a lot of correspondence 
from outside the court, or even contact from 
within the court-people coming to you with 
particular issues? 

Yes. I did have a lot of that and a lot with 
the press. I thought the press relations were 


very important, and I always responded to 
the press when they called. I know there is 
some reluctance for judges to do that, but I 
thought it was very important that the press 
was aware of what we were doing. Sometimes 
I couldn’t comment, obviously, on particular 
cases, but they came to fully understand 
that, and sometimes I would explain what 
the procedures would be and what would be 
happening off the record, and I would make 
that known before I said it. The press always 
honored that; I never had a problem that 
when I said something was “off the record,” 
so that I could explain the procedures that 
were going to be followed, or other things 
like that-they appreciated my candidness and 
kept my comments off the record. 

How did your caseload change or how did the 
management of your chambers change as a 
result of you being chief judge? 

Well, I had a person who was an 
administrative assistant to me as the chief 
judge in my chambers, and that was Mary 
Smotony. She was a great deal of help 
throughout all of this. Then, as chief judge, 
we were authorized an additional law clerk 
and that helped too because I needed some 
further help with regard to keeping myself 
current on the cases. 

Did you take a reduced caseload? 

No, I didn’t, that’s why I was glad to have 
the additional clerk. In fact, as chief judge, I 
was on all the en banc cases. 

That’s what I was about to ask you about. Tell 
me about the en banc cases and how that’s 
determined. You, as chief, have to preside? 

Yes. When a case is considered by one 
judge to be not correctly decided, that judge 



Changes in the Ninth Circuit 


119 


can request an en banc hearing. Then, all of 
the active judges vote on whether to take the 
case for an en banc hearing, and if a majority of 
the active judges decided that the case should 
be taken en banc, it is taken en banc. Then, 
the clerks office draws out of a little container 
that has various balls in it with judges’ names 
to see who will be on the en banc panel. The 
en banc panel consists of the chief judge and 
ten active judges that are chosen. As you say, 
I preside as the chief judge. I have to say, that 
is one of the most stimulating things I believe 
on the court is that when the eleven judges are 
there, at least when I was chief, we would go 
around the table, and I always thought that it 
was remarkable that with all of the thought 
that I had given to the case ahead of time, there 
was always something new brought to the table 
that I really hadn’t thought of before. I think all 
of us feel that way-so it is a very stimulating 
discussion at the conference after the en banc 
hearing. During the en banc hearing, it is also 
stimulating because of the questions that are 
asked and brought up by the judges from the 
attorneys. But the most stimulating part about 
it to me is the conference, after the hearing, 
when the judges are discussing the case. 

It must be. With all those intellects around the 
table and all those different points of view, you 
must get very lively exchanges at times. 

Yes, we do. 

So much of the coordination of the en bancs 
while you were chief was handled by the clerk’s 
office? 

Yes. 

Did you participate as chief judge in motions 
and screening panels-was that a regular part 
of your routine? 


Yes, I did. 

Was there any change in the number of 
calendars that you would participate in? 

No, it was the same number. 

Was there any problem with aging cases that 
were under submission? 

Well, there was because of the fact that we 
were so short of judges that we would have a 
problem of a backlog building up necessarily. 
We were always trying to develop ways that 
we could avoid having a backlog buildup but 
it was very difficult without the adequate 
number of judges. 

Were there any special techniques or procedures 
that were developed to handle that problem? 

Well, the one that I have mentioned-the 
screening program. That essentially was 
it-that and adding a third judge either from 
another circuit or from our district judges so 
that our panels were frequently made up of 
two of our judges and one visiting judge. 

Did the visiting judges tend to get an assignment 
of opinion writing? 

Yes, they would get the assignment of 
opinion writing on the cases that they were 
responsible for, which was about the same 
number as the other two judges on the panel. 

That would help spread the caseload around 
a little? 

Yes. 

Tell me about working with the clerk of court 
versus working with the circuit executive. 



120 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


Are there overlapping responsibilities for the 
management of the circuit? 

The clerk of court manages all of the things 
for the court of appeals. I believe we have the 
finest clerk of court in the entire country in 
Cathy Catterson, and I think all of us in the 
circuit would agree. She is able to handle the 
diverse personalities and the problems that 
are involved in this extreme caseload increase, 
with great ability The Circuit Executive’s 
Office principally deals with the district courts 
and the facilities for the district courts, the 
problems that are involved in the district 
courts, like for example, shortage of judges 
and sending a judge from Alaska, for example, 
might sit in Hawaii because Alaska did not, 
at one point, have the pressing caseload that 
Hawaii did because of the fact that we couldn’t 
get a district judge appointed there—that sort 
of thing. The Circuit Executive’s Office also 
handles the Ninth Circuit Judicial Conference 
and also the various district conferences 
throughout the Ninth Circuit, they provide 
staff service for those things. Essentially, 
the Circuit Executive’s Office deals with the 
district courts, and the clerk of court deals 
with the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. 

And now those two functions are almost 
combined, aren’t they? 

They are in a way, in that, Cathy [Catterson] 
has now become the circuit executive, and 
Molly Dwyer has now been appointed as 
clerk of court. But I suspect just because of 
Cathy’s experience that there will probably 
be a greater coordination between the two 
offices. 

I see. I would suspect the same. Other 
responsibilities, of course, for the chief judge, 
is doing things like conducting court meetings 


and executive committee meetings. Tell me a 
little bit about, is it the circuit judicial council 
that oversees the administration of the courts? 

Yes, the circuit judicial council, and it’s 
made up of an equal number of circuit judges 
and district judges, with representation, 
actually non-voting representation, from the 
bankruptcy judges and the magistrate judges, 
and also a representative from the senior 
judges. Actually, our circuit, among the many 
things that we originated in our circuit, one 
of the things was that the judicial council 
had always been composed only of circuit 
judges, and we thought that was not a good 
idea; we changed ours so that there were an 
equal number of district judges and an equal 
number of circuit judges. That eventually 
became the statutory requirement, but it was 
not until we changed it. 

Why did the circuit take that position? 

We felt that the district courts should have 
equal representation on the administrative of 
the whole circuit. 

Just a little more fair all the way around—a 
little more democratic and less from top down. 

Yes. 

As chief judge, you, of course, preside at the 
circuit conference. Were there any unusual 
circumstances surrounding the circuit 
conference when you were chief judge? Was 
there any change in the way the circuit 
conference was put together? 

I, as chief j udge, and the chief judges b efore 
would appoint a chairman of the conference 
and a conference executive committee that 
would take charge of putting the conference 



Changes in the Ninth Circuit 


121 


on, so it was really the responsibility of that 
chairman and executive committee as to the 
type of conference that will take place. The 
executive committee had terms of three years 
so there is some carryover. 

From time-to-time Congress has scrutinized 
the circuit conference or the circuit conference 
process. Was there any such scrutiny when you 
were chief judge that you recall? 

No. 

Do you recall where some of those conferences 
were? 

Yes. We had them in Sun Valley, Idaho, 
Hawaii, Portland, Seattle, Santa Barbara, so 
it’s around the circuit; we have had them in 
Alaska too. 

Oh really, that’s far afield. But never in Guam? 
Never in Guam. 

I don’t think in previous years, there was never 
a conference in China? Would the Ninth Circuit 
extend that far? [laughter] 

No, I am sure there was some considerable 
thought given, but it was never held there, 
[laughter]. 

Well, let’s turn to the big issue that really you 
had to confront as chief judge, and that is the 
attempts by Congress to divide the circuit. 
Tell a little bit about what you did to keep the 
circuit intact. 

Right after I was appointed, there was 
a very serious attempt to split the circuit 
that was moving fast in the Senate. Judge 


Browning and I went back to Washington, 
D.C., and talked to a lot of people, and I 
won’t go over that again, because I went over 
it on two different tapes before. But that was 
the first time and what had happened was 
through the strange procedures that took 
place, it was defeated in the Senate, which 
ended it for that year. Then the next year, 
there was an effort to split the circuit, and 
it was a very serious one because Senator 
[Ted] Stevens from Alaska had been upset 
about a particular decision that had been 
made in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals 
about taxation. He said that he was going 
to help Senator [Frank] Murkowski from 
Alaska get this circuit split. He attached it to 
an appropriations bill; and, of course, he was 
chairman of the appropriations committee 
in the Senate and very powerful. To the rest 
of the senators who didn’t care all that much 
about a splitting of the Ninth Circuit, as 
compared to whether they were going to get 
an airport or a road or bridge or something, 
they weren’t going to buck Senator Stevens. 
The bill was attached to the appropriations 
bill and could not be filibustered, and passed 
the Senate. 

Our big concern at that moment was that 
we had to do something to defeat it in the 
House. I remember that we had a meeting of 
our circuit court before I was to go back to D.C., 
and the way it was supposed to be split was 
not a satisfactory way and it was-Arizona and 
the five northern states (Alaska, Washington, 
Oregon, Idaho, and Montana); then Nevada, 
Hawaii and California, with Guam and the 
Northern Mariana Islands, as the remaining 
Ninth Circuit. I think it was engineered that 
way because Senator [Jon] Kyi from Arizona 
wanted to be part of the northern circuit. 
We called that the “Hop Scotch Circuit.” 
[laughter] Anyway, what we were concerned 
about was that there were no hearings held on 



122 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


that particular split at all; it was just attached 
to the appropriations bill. It went over to 
the House, as a part of an appropriations 
bill, which made it difficult because it didn’t 
go to the judiciary committee, which was 
chaired by Congressman [Henry] Hyde, it 
really went to the appropriations committee, 
and our relationship with the appropriations 
committee was difficult, which made it hard 
to get influence on to the committee. It was 
a very poor way to split a circuit, without a 
hearing as to the particularities, and so that 
was what we were particularly stressing. 
Chairman Hyde was extremely helpful in 
that. The appropriations committee respected 
Chairman Hyde’s opinion a lot. It was also 
a great help that [Circuit] Judge [Charles] 
Wiggins was with us because he was a very 
good friend of Congressman Hyde, and 
Congressman Hyde had a great deal of respect 
for the opinion of Judge Wiggins as a former 
Congressman. Judge Wiggins joined Judge 
Browning and me in attempting to defeat the 
bill. 

The approach that we were taking was 
that this really should not be done without 
looking at all of the circuits, with a type 
of commission that Senator Feinstein had 
recommended in previous bills that didn’t 
pass. Our approach, then, was that there 
should be such a commission appointed to 
study all of the circuits. We thought that some 
of the circuits, particularly the 11th Circuit, 
which was following the idea that they were 
going to have no new judges whatsoever, 
regardless of the increase in caseload. They 
had twelve judges, and they were going to 
handle matters with just the twelve judges, 
with no increases, even though their caseload 
was about two-thirds of ours. That was a very 
poor arrangement, and we thought that the 
commission should study all of the circuits 
throughout the country. Actually, at one stage, 


I gave a speech to the American Law Institute, 
talking about that, but we’ll talk about that 
later. What happened then, was that the 
House did pass such a commission. The 
proposed composition of the commission, 
as recommended by Senator Feinstein, was 
three from the House, three from the Senate, 
three from the President, and three the 
Judiciary. The final approved composition 
of the commission was there would be five 
members, and they would all be appointed by 
the Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court. 
He appointed Justice [Byron] White, as the 
chairman, and four others, and they were 
to study all of the circuits, with particular 
attention to the Ninth Circuit. That’s what 
they did. They went around the country and 
held hearings in all the various places. It was 
really significant to me that when they held a 
hearing in Seattle, where all of the impetuous 
for splitting the circuit took place; there were 
only five persons who testified to split it, and 
twenty persons who testified not to split it. 

Well, that’s interesting. 

Then the second hearing in our circuit 
was held in San Francisco, and there were 
thirty-seven persons who testified, only 
one person testified to split the circuit, and 
thirty-six testified not to split it. I thought 
that was a significant thing because here was 
a time that the White Commission was really 
trying to determine what the circuits wanted, 
what the approach was, whether they felt the 
circuit was working well or not, and to have 
that kind of a representation that we, in the 
Ninth Circuit, were very happy with the way 
the circuit was working, and leave us alone, 
[laughter] 

I guess there were some judges on the court of 
appeals who were in favor of a split. 



Changes in the Ninth Circuit 


123 


Yes, there were. 

But they were outnumbered by those who 
wanted to maintain the status quo. 

Well, only Judge Sneed spoke at the 
hearing in San Francisco. Maybe a better way 
to look at it is that when we voted as a court 
whether we wanted to split or not, there were 
only five active judges who wanted to split— 
they were from the north-and Judge Sneed. 
I think there were four out of the twenty 
senior judges who thought that we should 
split the circuit, but the rest of the judges 
overwhelmingly voted not to split the circuit. 

Ostensibly one of the reasons for changing the 
configurations of the circuits is the conflict of 
laws between circuits, obviously those cases 
have to usually end up before the Supreme 
Court, and some have advocated that rather 
than increasing the number of circuits, what 
the judiciary really needs to do is to reduce 
the number of circuits, make larger circuits, as 
opposed to having more circuits. Would you 
care to comment on that proposal? 

Yes. I think Judge Wallace wrote a law 
review article about that proposal. I think 
that makes a lot of sense. The fact is that it is 
politically not feasible, I don’t think, because 
the circuits in the east that are small would 
strongly resist being combined. It would make 
a lot of sense, and I thought maybe that would 
be something the White Commission might 
recommend, but I think they decided not to 
get into that aspect. 

What ultimately did the White Commission 
recommend with respect to the Ninth Circuit? 

They recommended that the circuit not 
be split. They said that there were about eight 


to ten different configurations that they had 
looked at and none of them worked well. They 
did make a proposal for how the Ninth Circuit 
could operate keeping together that was, in 
my opinion, completely infeasible. I wrote a 
position paper for our court as to why; later 
that was picked up in some law review articles 
too. But it actually made this a lot easier to 
defeat in Congress because the system was 
so infeasible. I thought it was an academic 
approach, without working out the details as 
to why it wouldn’t work, by Professor [Daniel] 
Meador, who turned out to be the director 
and was a law professor from the University 
of Virginia. It seemed to me that it was his 
academic idea that this would be a neat way 
to do things. We did go back to Congress and 
testify as to why it was infeasible. 

How was that received? 

It was received well, and some members 
of the bar came out and testified too. Senator 
Reid and Senator [Richard] Bryan were 
both opposed to it. I think that proposal by 
the White Commission was not seriously 
considered. 




16 


Judicial Philosophy and 
Challenges for the Judiciary 


I’d like to take a bit of a larger view now and 
ask you a little bit about judicial philosophy. 
Do you feel that your judicial philosophy has 
changed over time? And if so, how? Or did you 
come to the court with a set of beliefs and ideas 
and you pretty much stuck by them? 

I don’t think my philosophy really has 
changed much. Maybe in some specific things 
that, as I learned more that, I can think of one, 
and I’ll mention it in a minute but generally, 
I don’t think it’s changed. I do think that 
people probably had me pegged right when 
they write that I’m more of a centrist, because 
I don’t really think I have either a liberal or 
a conservative agenda. I certainly try to look 
carefully at the cases. I suppose maybe I may 
be a bit more sympathetic to individuals than 
maybe some other judges. I am inclined to try 
to look at what happened to the individual 
and how that person got there, and I am 
conscious of individual rights. I’ve always 
been that way and I’ve always tried to judge 
people, looking at it from their perspective. 
You probably saw a little of that when I was 


explaining about Judge Aguilar. That’s kind of 
the way I am. I am inclined to do that. 

Right. That was very interesting. The way 
you were revealed, going back over the 
circumstances and taking a lot of different 
factors into reconstructing the events that led 
to the situation. 

The one area that I, when I came to 
the court, was not much in favor of was 
the exclusionary rule, where evidence is 
suppressed because the police have made a 
mistake, and I now have come to the belief 
that that’s a good rule. You know, you look 
at it, on the one hand, from the standpoint 
that “the guilty man goes free because the 
constable erred” approach but, on the other 
hand, that’s really been the only effective way 
to encourage correct police conduct, and it 
has been very effective. I just noticed from 
the time I used to try criminal cases to now 
that it’s changed police administration a lot, 
because if an officer blows a case by going 
out and conducting an unauthorized search 



126 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


or questioning somebody before giving a 
Miranda warning, the police administration 
and the district attorney and everybody comes 
down on him saying, “Oh my gosh, you’re 
fouling up the case.” So it’s really changed the 
approach in management of law enforcement 
officials to be conscious of individual rights. 
I’m not confident that any other basis, lawsuits 
and so forth, would really do it because 
what happens to the person who has been 
wrongfully stopped or wrongfully searched or 
wrongfully arrested, usually they’re so glad to 
get out of it all that they’re not going to file a 
suit. Periodically people will, but it has to be 
fairly egregious before somebody’s going to 
do it. If police go storming into somebody’s 
house and they don’t find anything, people 
are real mad, but they’re not going to do that 
much about it; whereas, if they do that and 
just completely blow a criminal case, their 
superiors are going to be right on their case. 

But some people think that we’ve gone too far 
in that direction. 

I know. I don’t think there are that many 
cases where a case is dismissed because of 
that. It’s pretty rare, really. 

Are there other elements of your thinking about 
the law that you see as having evolved ? 

Well, I was never very conscious of 
immigration law in practice. I really didn’t 
ever do any of it. And when I came on the 
court, we had a lot of cases that involved 
immigration law, and it was interesting to 
me the way those cases were developing. I 
suppose that might be an area in which my 
looking at the individual’s position would be 
somewhat different than other judges, not 
necessarily that my way is wrong or right. For 
example, one of the earliest cases that I had 


was Urbano de Malaluan [v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service ]. This was a person 
who had overstayed her visa and, thus, 
her stay was illegal. She’d gone through a 
deportation hearing, and they ordered her 
to be deported, but they never got around 
to deporting her. And so she stayed on for 
about, I think it was eight years. She was 
a secretary, I think a legal secretary, but a 
secretary in some capacity and had been a 
productive member of society. She had two 
children and was married to another alien 
who was lawfully here. Someway in the 
records, they found her and brought her up 
to now deport her. There was a provision in 
the statutes, which if you had been here seven 
years and had been of good moral character 
and to deport you would be an extreme 
hardship, then there is the discretion to be 
able to waive the deportation. 

So I remember I was on this case with 
Judge [Anthony] Kennedy, now Justice 
Kennedy, and a district judge from Montana, 
Judge William J. Jameson, who had been 
president of the ABA, a real fine man. It was 
a very close case, but I just felt that if there 
were ever a situation in which this provision 
in the statute should be applied, this was it. 
She had one child that was nearly school- 
aged and the other was going to school. They 
only spoke English and looking from the 
standpoint of the children, as well as from 
her standpoint, but it seemed to me that was 
an ideal situation to apply the waiver. Here 
was a productive person—employed—it was 
going to break up the family, and children 
who only spoke English. It was going to 
be extremely disruptive and this would be 
the kind of person we’d want to keep here. 
Judge Kennedy more literally applied the 
law and thought that we had to give the 
deference to the determination of the Board 
of Immigration Appeals, to which we were 



Judicial Philosophy and Challenges for the Judiciary 


127 


supposed to defer, and that however we might 
feel about it, we didn’t have the authority 
to overrule them. It was a close question. 
This was within the first year or two that I 
was on the court, and we only had thirteen 
members. Judge Kennedy had asked for en 
banc consideration, and we had our court 
meeting and right afterwards, instead of 
voting by email, as we do now, right after the 
court meeting, we then said, well, now this is 
a good time to consider whether we’re going 
to take this case en banc. 

Judge Kennedy and I each gave our little 
oral arguments as to why we thought it should 
or shouldn’t be taken and then went around 
the table voting on it. And I remember Judge 
[Ozell] Trask, who I knew was in favor of my 
point of view, was confused as to what a yes 
or a no meant because I could tell that. As 
it was going around, he had voted the other 
way, and I went over and whispered in his 
ear. [laughter]. So he changed his vote, and I 
think it was seven-to-six not to take the case 
en banc. It was interesting thinking back on 
that, it was kind of a funny situation, but it 
was a very close case. I’ve often wondered 
what ever happened to her. I never knew. 

Yes, it’s curious, isn’t it? Well, that sort of leads 
to another question more generally about your 
attitude toward judicial activism. I know 
that, I’ve read a speech I think you gave at 
a judicial college many years ago about the 
living constitution and your attitude about the 
constitution as a document that had evolved 
over time. It’s not something that was intended 
to be confined strictly to the text crafted 200 
years ago. 

That’s right. 

So what’s your attitude toward judicial 
activism? 


Well, you know, it’s funny what a person 
thinks of as judicial activism. I think it is in 
the eye of the beholder. There’s activism both 
from the standpoint of judges who are more 
liberal and judges who are more conservative. 
You read about that all the time. You know, the 
Warren Court was an activist court, and now 
people are saying the Rehnquist Court is an 
activist court the other way. The way I view it 
is that I think that the Constitution does have 
to be construed as a living document. There is 
no way that the conditions of our country now 
could be governed by sterile legal language 
that was thought of two hundred years ago. 
The genius of the Constitution is the fact 
that it was phrased broadly, not with minute 
specifics, but phrased broadly so that it can be 
interpreted in light of current circumstances, 
and the word, that I think is the key word you 
mentioned is “evolving.” 

We look at it in the context of a world that 
now has computers, airplanes, telephones, 
and television, as opposed to the world 
that was known then, horse and buggy, no 
railroads, no cars, no airplanes, and a much 
smaller country. I mean no one really, without 
some extraordinary vision, could have ever 
thought that we would have this whole 
continent from coast to coast. And society 
is so much different than it was then, so that 
I think the real secret of our continuance 
under the Constitution is the fact that it can 
be interpreted in that way without having 
to be amended specifically every time there 
is a change within the country. And it does 
provide a real bedrock of guiding principles 
for us but that gradually those are developed 
just as we did with civil rights, in Brown v. 
Board of Education. When the Constitution 
was initially enacted it was thought that the 
slaves weren’t really to be considered persons 
and women couldn’t vote. All those things 
have changed, and I think our Constitution 



128 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


is much sounder to be interpreted in light of 
those circumstances, but the word is correct 
when you use it and that’s “evolve.” 

Well, certainly the courts have changed over 
time, too. 

Yes. 

And today, I guess there are more and more 
challenges that are facing the courts. What do 
you see as some of the challenges facing the 
judicial system today ? 

Well, the more immediate challenge that’s 
facing the federal courts right now, and I’m 
hoping it’s a temporary one, and that is the 
reluctance to provide the number of judges 
that are needed to do the job right. And partly 
this is due, in my view, to the members of our 
appellate courts themselves, because of the 
resistance to growth. There’s the thought of 
capping the federal judiciary at a thousand 
in order to encourage Congress not to pass 
additional laws that are an addition to our 
jurisdiction. Well, I think that’s very naive. 
Because there’s no way that Congress can or 
should determine what is necessary for the 
conduct of the country by the desire of some 
judges to remain a small court or a small 
federal judiciary. I think it’s very important 
that we have the adequate federal judges that 
are necessary to do the job that Congress has 
assigned to us. 

I’ve just recently given some speeches 
about this. I’m very concerned. The difficulty 
with determining whether a circuit should be 
split or how big it should get is all wrapped 
up in the question of how we organize 
this intermediate court system, the courts 
of appeals. Since 1960, the district courts 
generally have been accorded the number 


of judges necessary. There has been a thirty- 
five percent increase over that time which is 
modest; the caseload per district judge has 
increased thirty-five percent. During this 
same time, the caseload per judge in the 
appellate courts has increased 347 percent. 
The only way that we can continue to 
manage the case load, without increasing the 
number of judges, would be to have greater 
delegation to staff or more cursory review 
by the judges, neither of which is desirable. 
Or the third alternative is to keep accepting 
more and more cases and just figure some 
way it will take care of itself. But it can’t. We 
have to decide whether we’re going to have 
more circuits or larger circuits or the third 
alternative keep accepting cases, but that just 
can’t be a reasonable solution. 

That’s kind of the quagmire that we’re in, 
and I’m sure we’re going to think our way 
out of it as a country, we always have, but 
right now that’s a real threat to the continued 
excellence of the federal judiciary. In the 
Ninth Circuit, we feel that a large circuit 
has worked and will work very well with our 
twenty-eight active judges. We think it can 
work well with thirty-eight active judges. 
Maybe at some time we’ll determine that it’s 
not effective to add more circuit judges and 
then we’ll split, like the Fifth Circuit decided 
when it got to a certain stage. It split at an 
earlier stage. 

There are some circuits in the country, 
the Eleventh being one; they’ll accept any 
number of cases because they don’t want to 
get any larger than twelve. And so they have 
this enormous caseload and that just can’t 
be good for the continued operation of the 
federal courts. I think that ours was sort of 
an experiment as to see how a large court can 
work. We’ve made it work well, and we just 
have to continue monitoring it. If, at some 



Judicial Philosophy and Challenges for the Judiciary 


129 


stage, it doesn’t work well and the judges and 
the lawyers are not happy with the way it’s 
going, then we’ll do something about it and 
possibly divide it. 

Well, what has contributed to this enormous 
increase in caseload for the courts of appeals? 

As the country’s population grew and 
as more and more district judges were 
added and more and more case load in the 
lower courts were added, the failure to add 
correspondingly the circuit judges that are 
necessary to handle that. 

So the total number of appeals judges, 
appellate judges has remained relatively 
stable? 

Yes. 

As opposed to the districts? 

Right. 

I see. I suppose too that there’s been an increase 
in the federalization of certain crimes. 

Indeed. That has contributed to it—the 
federalization of crimes and the civil rights 
statutes, employment discrimination, 
disability laws, and prisoner appeals. 

Right, and we’ve talked about that, the pro se 
cases and the effect that that’s had. 

In fairness, I would have to say that part 
of that increase has been a considerable 
number of cases that are fairly frivolous or 
non-meritorious. So that the full amount of 
that would not have to be rectified but a good 
deal of it would. 


What would you say is the extent of the Ninth 
Circuit’s influence on public policy? 

Pretty substantial. 

In what ways? 

Well, the Ninth Circuit has been kind of 
on the cutting edge of a lot of areas in law— 
partly because it has a considerably diversified 
population with different problems that arise 
that a lot of key cases have been brought up in 
the Ninth Circuit, in which we’ve had to rule, 
and I suspect maybe the lawyers are more 
willing to bring up unusual cases. 

And why do you think they’re more willing to 
bring unusual cases here? 

I think, generally, westerners are inclined 
not to be as much bound by tradition and that 
the western culture is a little bit more free- 
spirited. One of the other areas of course that 
the Ninth Circuit has been very influential in 
because of its geography is environmental law. 




17 


Concluding Thoughts 


Are there other things you’d like to tell us about 
your life or about your tenure on the bench that 
I have haven’t thought to ask you? 

Well, I guess, right now, one of the major 
concerns I have as chief judge is developing 
what we’re going to be doing for the next year 
or so when we have somewhere between six 
and nine vacancies on our court and no new 
judges under a new judgeship bill that we’ve 
requested, so that we have a lot larger case 
load than we really should have to handle, and 
what we’re going to do about that? And I’ve set 
up a committee now to develop alternatives 
that we’ll be considering as to what we should 
do. I mean conceivably we can let the backlog 
build and say, “It’s Congress’s problem,” or we 
can make some herculean efforts to develop 
new ways of doing things that would be 
temporary 

What I’d like to see, frankly, is to say we 
should make every effort we can to keep 
up with our caseload, but we should make 
it known to the public and to the bar that 
we’re doing some certain things, emergency 


measures, not that we want to continue it 
in this way, not so that Congress can say, 
“You’ve done it in the past, now you can keep 
doing it.” But things like judgment orders and 
restricting oral argument or restricting the 
number of opinions that we write, that we 
would do, with the idea that this is not the 
way we should be continuing to do it, but 
we owe an obligation to the parties to get a 
decision. Now a lot of members on the court 
feel very differently about it. We have as many 
opinions as we have judges, I suppose, as to 
how we should do this, but that’s what we’re 
going to try to develop, by looking at all the 
various alternatives, what can we do in a more 
efficient manner—in our fast-track screening 
programs, what can we do in this way or other. 
But always the concern in the background is 
that, you know, if we do this, we don’t want 
Congress to think, ah hah, you can handle a 
much greater caseload, because in doing that 
we’re not doing as effective or thorough a job 
as we should. 

I guess one thing just from a standpoint 
of personal pride, I was just figuring up the 



132 


Procter R. Hug, Jr. 


thing, the ones that have gone to the Supreme 
Court, I think I’ve had fifteen cases that have 
gone there, and I have ten affirmances, three 
reversals, and two where they were reversed 
one part and affirmed the other. 

That’s a very impressive record. 

Yes, pretty good. One of the other things 
I was thinking the other day that I have only 
had two cases that I’ve written the panel 
opinion on that have been taken en banc and 
in both of them the en banc court went the 
way I did on the panel. 

That’s even more impressive because these are 
your colleagues. 

[laughter] I don’t know, but anyway that’s 
the record, I don’t say that to anybody but 
you—but put that in my record somewhere, 
tuck it away, because I felt good about it. 

We definitely will. Anything else? 

Well, let me think. I can’t really think 
of anything offhand, other than that I’ve 
certainly enjoyed my time on the bench. I 
mean, I enjoyed practicing law enormously. I 
really had a lot of fun doing it, and I felt good 
about it but I’ve enjoyed the bench so much. I 
enjoy the people on the bench. There, I would 
have to say that I think that the personnel that 
are in the federal courts and our circuit, both 
our courts of appeal and the district judges, 
really are extremely competent people. I just 
have enormous respect for all of them. The 
district judges are exceptionally fine trial 
judges. Where you see it the most on our 
circuit court of appeals is in the en banc cases 
because we’ll sit around, they’ll be eleven of us 
sitting around a table and it’s very rare indeed 


that I’ll go to an en banc case, having studied 
very thoroughly, that I won’t hear some very 
significant new approaches from some judges 
who have seen it in just a little different way 
that really makes sense. I’m impressed with 
how thorough all the judges really look into 
the cases and really think about it. It’s kind of 
a matter of pride, I guess, with all of us. When 
we see everyone else is doing that thorough of 
a job, we’re not going to slack up either. There 
really has never been an organization that I’ve 
been that impressed with, just the complete 
thoroughness of the way they approach their 
jobs. 

Is there anything you want to add to our 
conversation—questions I haven’t asked you 
about—is there anything that you wanted to 
tell me about in your tenure as chief judge that 
I hadn’t asked you about? 

Yes. I would like to tell you about the 
importance of my family to me. My family 
has been very important to me during my 
entire career as a lawyer and a judge, and I 
am very proud of them. Barbara did a great 
job in raising our three children, and when 
they were older she had a successful career of 
her own. She was vice-president of Nevada 
Telephone and Telegraph Company for ten 
years and was on the board of directors of 
the First National Bank of Nevada and of St. 
Mary’s Hospital. She received a Distinguished 
Nevadan Award from the University of 
Nevada. She was particularly helpful to me 
when I was chief judge in managing all of 
the spouses’ events at our conferences. That 
contributed a lot to the collegiality of the 
judges. 

I am also proud of our three children. 
Our daughter, Cheryl, is a medical doctor and 
is currently in charge of the Student Health 



Concluding Thoughts 


133 


Services at the University of Nevada, Reno. 
Our son, Procter, is a practicing attorney in 
Reno, and is highly regarded by his clients 
and by other attorneys. My daughter, Elyse, 
was a very popular and excellent fifth grade 
teacher. She left teaching to raise her three 
daughters. I am also proud of our eight 
grandchildren, who are all doing well. One of 
the things I am most pleased about is that all 
of our children and grandchildren get along 
very well together and are supportive of each 
other. 



