Lai King Chew: 

The Cosmo Club and 
Reno’s Chinese Community 


Interviewee: Lai King Chew 
Interviewed: 1992-1995 
Published: 2000 

Interviewers: Hwa-di Brodhead and Michael Brodhead 
UNOHP Catalog #184 


Description 

Between 1849 and 1876 the population of Chinese immigrants coming to the U.S. swelled to 151,000. Beset by war 
and famine at home, the Chinese were attracted to the promise of gold in the Western United States. Called “coolies,” 
the Chinese worked in the mines and helped to build the railroads in Nevada. Sober, thrifty, and industrious, the 
Chinese eventually found great resentment among the U.S. labor force, laws to keep them off the railroad work 
crews, and a move to limit their immigration. In the 1860s the Chinese moved into a broad range of occupations. 
Many became quite prosperous as merchants and restaurateurs, especially in the larger cities of San Francisco, 
Seattle, and Vancouver, British Columbia. 

Lai King Chew’s father emigrated from China to Port Townsend, Washington in 1860. He migrated to Nevada, where 
he worked on the railroad, then moved back to the state of Washington where he found success as a merchant and 
respect as an arbitrator in the Chinese community there. He hired a matchmaker to find him a wife in China and 
brought her to the U.S. in 1890 under false pretenses with a bought birth certificate. Together they had nine children. 

Lai King Chew grew up in Seattle, was educated at St. Theresa’s College in Winona, Minnesota, the College of 
William and Mary, and New York University, receiving a Bachelor of Fine Arts in 1935. She lived in Vancouver, 
British Columbia with her first husband, Thomas Chang, and had two children. After divorcing, she settled in 
Seattle, later marrying Charlie Chew. They moved to Reno in 1956 and opened a casino for blacks and Indians, 
who at that time were not allowed to gamble in the clubs in Reno. Charlie Chew died suddenly in 1961, and Mrs. 
Chew quickly learned the gambling business and ran the club herself until 1966. 

The Cosmo Club on Commercial Row was a very colorful place. Mrs. Chew’s recollections well describe the wild 
popularity of keno, a game introduced by the Chinese to the American gambling scene. She recalls the dark and 
dangerous side of downtown Reno and the characters that frequented this neighborhood. 

In Nevada Mrs. Chew found prejudice and discrimination for the first time in her life. She found that people of 
her race would not be served in some Reno restaurants, nor could they rent a nice apartment. Mrs. Chew tells of 
the Joss House Society and how the Chinese community took care of their own, settling disputes, providing for the 
unfortunate, arranging burials. She often interpreted for Chinese in legal and medical matters in Reno. Through 
her memories we learn of the lifestyle of the Chinese in Reno, and their close ties to their homeland and their loved 
ones in China. 


(Continued on next page.) 


Description (continued) 


The Civil Rights Act of 1964 made discrimination in clubs and restaurants illegal, so as the blacks began moving 
uptown to gamble, business at the Cosmo Club declined. Mrs. Chew closed the club in 1966. After the Cosmo 
Club, Mrs. Chew worked with her friend Tom Wong, helping him run the Sagebrush Club in Fallon. The clientele 
in Fallon was very different from that of the Cosmo Club—mostly cowboys and local business people and ranchers 
and farmers as well as the young airmen from Fallon Naval Air Station. 

Mrs. Chew also shares memories of her travels to China: first, as a little girl; again, after high school graduation; 
and then, several trips made between 1979 and 1992, when life in China had changed severely, due to takeovers by, 
first, the Japanese and then, the communists. She describes the changes in her ancestors’ village and the hardships 
endured by relatives in China. 

Lai King Chew’s oral history is a valuable contribution to our knowledge of gambling and downtown Reno in the 
1950s and 1960s, as well as our knowledge of the Chinese community in Nevada at that time. Mrs. Chew is a well- 
respected businesswoman, whose clientele at the Cosmo Club was like a family where she was the mother hen, 
constantly making sure that everyone was OK and things were taken care of. Her recollections are fascinating, and 
the reader will enjoy getting to know this strong, courageous, and wise woman. 


Lai King Chew: 

The Cosmo Club and 
Reno’s Chinese Community 




Lai King Chew: 

The Cosmo Club and 
Reno’s Chinese Community 


Oral History Conducted by Hwa-di Brodhead and Michael Brodhead 
Edited by Victoria Ford and Kathleen Coles 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 2000 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 2000. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 

Director: R. T. King 
Assistant Director: Mary Larson 
Production Manager: Kathleen Coles 
Editors: Victoria Ford, Kathleen Coles 
Text Design: Linda Sommer 
Production Assistants: Ann Dalbec, Amy Fiack, 
Verne Foster, Danny Howard 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words maybe quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Original Preface xi 

Introduction xiii 

1. Ancestors, Childhood, Education 1 

2. The Cosmo Club: 1956-1966 15 

3. After the Cosmo Club 35 

4. The Chinese in Reno 41 

5. Travels 49 

Original Index: For Reference Only 57 




Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Lai King Chew 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Original Preface 


Since 1965 the University of Nevada 
Oral History Program has been collecting an 
eyewitness account of Nevada’s remembered 
past. Following the precedent established by 
Allan Nevins at Columbia University in 1948 
(and perpetuated since by academic programs 
such as ours throughout the English-speaking 
world) these manuscripts are called oral 
histories. Some confusion surrounds the 
meaning of the term. To the extent that these 
“oral” histories can be read, they are not oral, 
and while they are useful historical sources, 
they are not themselves history. Still, custom 
is a powerful force; historical and cultural 
records that originate in tape-recorded 
interviews are almost uniformly labeled “oral 
histories,” and our program follows that usage. 

Oral histories conducted by UNOHP 
are meant as firsthand accounts that serve 
the function of primary source documents, 
as valuable in the process of historiography 
as the written records with which historians 
customarily work. However, while the 
properly conducted oral history is a reliable 
source, verifying the accuracy of all of the 


statements made in the course of an interview 
would require more time and money than the 
UNOHP s operating budget permits. 

As with all such efforts, while we can vouch 
that this work is an authentic expression of Lai 
King Chew’s remembered past, the UNOHP 
does not claim that the work is free of error. It 
should be approached with the same caution 
that the prudent reader exercises when 
consulting government records, newspaper 
accounts, diaries, and other sources of 
historical information. 

Each finished manuscript is the product 
of a collaboration—its structure influenced 
by the directed questioning of an informed, 
well-prepared interviewer, and its articulation 
refined through editing. While the words in 
this published oral history are essentially 
those of Lai King Chew, the text is not a 
verbatim transcription of the interview as it 
occurred. In producing a manuscript, it is 
the practice of the UNOHP to employ the 
language of the chronicler, but to edit for 
clarity and readability. By shifting text when 
necessary, by polishing syntax, and by deleting 



Lai King Chew 


xii 


or subsuming the questions of the interviewer, 
a first-person narrative with chronological 
and topical order is created. 

While there is no standard chronicler 
profile nor rigid approach to interviewing, 
each oral history plumbs human memory to 
gain a better understanding of the past. 

Michael Brodhead began interviewing 
Lai King Chew in January of 1992. Further 
interviews were conducted by Hwa-di 
Brodhead in late 1994 through June of 1995 
to fill in important details and provide a richer 
record. 

The tape recordings from which this 
manuscript is derived are in the archives of the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program 
where they can be heard by appointment. 

UNOHP 
April 2000 



Introduction 


Between 1849 and 1876 the population 
of Chinese immigrants to the U.S. swelled to 
151,000. Beset by war and famine at home, the 
Chinese were attracted to the promise of gold 
in the Western United States. Called “coolies,” 
the Chinese worked in the mines and helped 
to build the railroads in Nevada. Sober, thrifty, 
and industrious, the Chinese eventually found 
great resentment among the U.S. labor force, 
laws to keep them off the railroad work crews, 
and a move to limit their immigration. In 
the 1860s the Chinese moved into a broad 
range of occupations. Many became quite 
prosperous as merchants and restaurateurs, 
especially in the larger cities of San Francisco, 
Seattle, and Vancouver, British Columbia. 

Lai King Chew’s father emigrated from 
China to Port Townsend, Washington in 1860. 
He migrated to Nevada, where he worked on 
the railroad, then moved back to the state 
of Washington where he found success as 
a merchant and respect as an arbitrator in 
the Chinese community there. He hired a 
matchmaker to find him a wife in China and 
brought her to the U.S. in 1890 under false 


pretenses with a bought birth certificate. 
Together they had nine children. 

Lai King Chew grew up in Seattle, was 
educated at St. Theresa’s College in Winona, 
Minnesota, College of William and Mary, and 
New York University, receiving a Bachelor of 
Fine Arts in 1935. She lived in Vancouver, 
British Columbia with her first husband, 
Thomas Chang, and had two children. 
After divorcing, she settled in Seattle, later 
marrying Charlie Chew. They moved to Reno 
in 1956 and opened a casino for blacks and 
Indians, who at that time were not allowed to 
gamble in the clubs in Reno. Charlie Chew 
died suddenly in 1961, and Mrs. Chew quickly 
learned the gambling business and ran the 
club herself until 1966. 

The Cosmo Club on Commercial Row 
was a very colorful place. Mrs. Chew’s 
recollections well describe the wild popularity 
of keno, a game introduced by the Chinese 
to the American gambling scene. She recalls 
the dark and dangerous side of downtown 
Reno and the characters that frequented this 
neighborhood. 



XIV 


Lai King Chew 


In Nevada Mrs. Chew found prejudice 
and discrimination for the first time in her 
life. She found that people of her race would 
not be served in some Reno restaurants, 
nor could they rent a nice apartment. Mrs. 
Chew tells of the Joss House Society and 
how the Chinese community took care of 
their own, settling disputes, providing for 
the unfortunate, arranging burials. She often 
interpreted for Chinese in legal and medical 
matters in Reno. Through her memories we 
learn of the lifestyle of the Chinese in Reno, 
and their close ties to their homeland and 
their loved ones in China. 

The Civil Rights Act of 1964 made 
discrimination in clubs and restaurants illegal, 
so as the blacks began moving uptown to 
gamble, business at the Cosmo Club declined. 
Mrs. Chew closed the club in 1966. After 
the Cosmo Club, Mrs. Chew worked with 
her friend Tom Wong, helping him run the 
Sagebrush Club in Fallon. The clientele in 
Fallon was very different from that of the 
Cosmo Club—mostly cowboys and local 
business people and ranchers and farmers as 
well as the young airmen from Fallon Naval 
Air Station. 

Mrs. Chew also shares memories of her 
travels to China: first, as a little girl; again, 
after high school graduation; and then, several 
trips made between 1979 and 1992, when 
life in China had changed severely, due to 
takeovers by, first, the Japanese and then, the 
communists. She describes the changes in her 
ancestors’ village and the hardships endured 
by relatives in China. 

Lai King Chew’s oral history is a valuable 
contribution to our knowledge of gambling 
and downtown Reno in the 1950s and 1960s, 
as well as our knowledge of the Chinese 
community in Nevada at that time. Mrs. Chew 
is a well-respected businesswoman, whose 
clientele at the Cosmo Club was like a family 


where she was the mother hen, constantly 
making sure that everyone was OK and 
things were taken care of. Her recollections 
are fascinating, and the reader will enjoy 
getting to know this strong, courageous, and 
wise woman. 

Kathleen Coles 
Reno, Nevada 
April, 2000 




Charles and Lai King Chew 

1959 




1 

Ancestors, Childhood, Education 


My parents were from the southern part 
of China, from the villages in the Guangdong 
Province along the South China Sea and the 
Pearl River. My father’s village, Hoi San, was 
about 150 or 200 miles inland. My father 
was born in 1844, and his name was Hock 
Gan Eng. [U.S. Immigration officials gave 
my father an Americanized name, Clyde Eng, 
because he was the youngest son, and the 
Chinese word for “the small” sounded like 
Clyde.] My mothers name was Wong Ling 
Goon. She was born in 1874. [She actually 
came into the U.S. with a bought paper 
under the name of Gook Soo Lee, a Chinese- 
American baby born in Portland, Oregon.] 
My father spoke the Fourth Dialect, and my 
mother the Third Dialect. The Third Dialect 
is Cantonese and more refined. The Fourth 
Dialect is more like village Chinese, a little 
rougher. My mother learned to understand 
both dialects. Sometimes, by the dialects that 
people speak, you know where they come 
from. 

My father came to America in the 1860s 
on a schooner. He arrived in Port Townsend, 


Washington and then migrated to Nevada, 
where he worked on the railroad. I don’t 
know the dates exactly. Then he left Nevada 
and went back to Port Townsend when my 
mother arrived there in 1890. They had not 
met before she arrived in the United States. 
This was an arranged marriage. My father 
sent a matchmaker back to China to find him 
a young wife. The matchmaker went back 
there and scoured many, many villages to 
look for a young lady, a young woman, and 
came upon my mother in her village. With 
this matchmaker was a picture of my father 
when he was nineteen years old. When my 
grandmother saw a handsome young man of 
nineteen years old (in the picture), she agreed 
to the marriage, [laughter] My mother was 
only sixteen when she arrived here, while my 
father was considerably older—in his forties. 
Although he had a wife his age in China, he 
wanted a young wife in the United States, 
so he could have a family here. And he did. 
[laughter] He had been in the United States 
since his teens, for thirty years before my 
mother arrived. 



2 


Lai King Chew 


My mother arrived in Port Townsend with 
her fourteen-year-old maid servant. Their 
steamer couldn’t dock because the harbor 
was too shallow, so they were transported by 
sailors in a dinghy to Port Townsend. When 
my mother arrived on the dock and saw my 
father in the buggy with a crop of white hair, 
she wanted to get back on the dinghy and 
leave and go back to China. But the dinghy 
had already left, so she had no alternative but 
to stay. 

My parents lived in Port Townsend for 
a time and then in the early 1900s moved 
to Victoria, British Columbia, where my 
father went to work on the Canadian Pacific 
Railroad. He wasn’t very successful, though; 
he lost a great deal of money to a con artist 
there, [laughter] So they came back to Port 
Townsend and opened a Chinese grocery 
store. There were other relatives from the Eng 
family, mostly nephews his age or younger, 
that had emigrated from China and landed in 
Port Townsend with him, and they originally 
had the store. 

I think a sister was born between 1890 
and 1896 who died in infancy, and then my 
older sister Fanny was born in 1896. She is 
still alive. After her another sister was born 
who also died in infancy. I think my mother 
was too young for childbearing. And then, a 
brother, William, was born in Port Townsend 
in 1902, so there were four children born in 
Port Townsend. William passed away about 
three years ago, in his eighties. 

My parents later left and went to Seattle 
and established a home, where the remainder 
of their children were born. All together my 
mother had nine children: two of the sisters 
died at infancy, and then there were four boys 
and three girls. My brother Benjamin was the 
next child after William. He passed away in 
1935 or 1937, somewhere around there. After 


Ben was another brother, James, and he is 
still living. I was born next after James. Then 
Harry was born. He just passed away last year. 
Then my sister Della is the youngest. Today 
there are three sisters and two brothers still 
alive. I have a sister who is now ninety-six 
years old. 

My sister Fanny married a James, so 
we had to distinguish between my brother 
and my brother-in-law. So my brother was 
called Jimmy. My brother-in-law James was a 
businessman. He went back to China and had 
theaters and hotels and restaurants. He had 
the investments all over. When the Japanese 
came, and then the communists came, the 
only thing my sister’s family did was escape 
with their lives and the clothes they had on. 
That’s it. 

The reason, I think, my father left Port 
Townsend is because Seattle was opening 
up to be a port for immigrants. Ships were 
arriving there. I remember that my father 
was tall, had snow white hair, and he was 
very firm, very traditional, but he was never 
abusive. He was very kind, and people in the 
community respected him. He was considered 
a merchant and an elder in the community. He 
didn’t belong to any tongs. As a consequence, 
he was called upon as an arbitrator many 
times during tong wars of that time, [laughter] 
There were a lot of tong wars. He had a store, a 
Chinese merchandise store, on King Street in 
Seattle. He sold Chinese staples and Chinese 
items to outlying towns and cities where there 
was a Chinese establishment. And he took 
care of the immigrants arriving from China. 
He’d take care of their entry into the United 
States and send them on their way to wherever 
their destination was—Chicago, New York, 
or whatever. It wasn’t so much a business—I 
don’t think he received any compensation 
for it, because he had a very thriving grocery 



Ancestors, Childhood, Education 


3 


store. He just wanted to help the immigrants 
coming through there. 

My father had lived in Nevada for a 
number of years, I understand, and one day 
when my husband and I were in Las Vegas, 
we went to a museum that had some Chinese 
artifacts. We looked around and saw on a 
wall a list of Chinese names and donations 
made to a Chinese charity. Among the names 
there was my fathers name and that of one 
of his relatives. In those days the donation 
was ten cents—there were quite a few ten- 
cent donations given to charity, [laughter] 
But under my fathers name was a donation 
of twenty cents. We thought “Hmm, he was 
wealthier than the others!” [laughter] It 
was very interesting. (I understand that the 
whole museum subsequently was bought by 
somebody else and moved to Florida.) 

There was an old, old gentleman, Henry 
Woo, who was born in 1865 and had come 
to Nevada as a very young man. He knew my 
father, because he worked with him on the 
railroad. We happened to talk one day in Reno 
at the Cosmo Bar, and we exchanged names 
and fathers and so on. He said “I knew your 
father; we worked together. He was older—he 
was a crew boss on the railroad, and I worked 
under him.” Henry Woo proceeded to give 
us a lot of background information about 
my father that I had never known, which 
was very interesting. I don’t know where in 
Nevada my father worked for the railroad. 
Old Henry just mentioned the railroad, and 
so had my mother many years earlier. But we 
were so young that we never questioned her; 
it was just a statement. 

My father had some property in Hong 
Kong, and he had family in the village. As I 
said, he had an elderly wife in China—in those 
days it was customary to have more than one 


wife, [laughter] In China they married very 
young, you know. The elderly wife in China 
was more his age, and they had a son and a 
daughter, both of whom were older than my 
mother. Both the son and daughter married in 
China. I understand from relatives in China 
that the boy was a scholar and was elected 
to go to Peking to take an examination. If 
he passed it, he was to return to his district 
and become a mandarin. A mandarin is a 
magistrate, a government administrator. He 
sits like in court in that little township or in 
the vicinity. That was before the 1900s, don’t 
forget, [laughter] So he journeyed. There 
was no airplane, no railroad, no auto, and he 
traveled by foot from Canton to Peking to take 
the examination. While en route, he became 
ill and he died; he never reached Peking. It 
broke my father’s heart; he never got over it. 
This half-brother of mine left a wife and a son 
and a daughter in the village. My sister Della 
adopted Jenny, who is the granddaughter of 
my half-brother. I have met my half-sister, 
but not my half-brother. He was already dead 
when I visited China in 1929. My half-sister 
in China married and had a family of three 
sons and a daughter. My half-sister lived to 
be a hundred and three years old. 

My father died when we were very young, 
so we didn’t learn too much from him—just 
from my mother. I never talked to him much 
about his family. When he died, I think in 
1921, he left my mother a young widow with 
seven surviving children at that time. He died 
in China in 1921 at the ripe old age of seventy- 
seven. He had gone back to China to settle a 
piece of real estate he had in Hong Kong, and 
then he went back to the village to visit his old 
home and contracted pneumonia and died in 
the village, and he was buried in the village. 
Prior to that he had never been sick a day in 
his life, but he’d been in America too long, 



4 


Lai King Chew 


I guess, and his constitution was probably 
more acclimatized to the Western world. He 
just couldn’t survive the sanitation and the 
climate in China. 

My father was the youngest of four 
children, I think, three boys and a girl. I’m not 
sure. My father brought the sons of his older 
brother (number two in the family) with him 
to America. He had three houses in the village 
of Hoi San in China. He had a home where 
his first wife lived in China, and later he sent 
money back from the United States for two 
more houses to be built alongside: one for his 
brother, number two brother in the family, 
and one for number five nephew. 

Number two brother stayed in China and 
had a bakery in the township, and a junk (a 
Chinese square-sailed, flat-bottomed boat) 
for business between towns. All these villages 
around, they have a marketplace, where they 
go and buy their supplies, or they go there to 
sell whatever they produce. The bakery was in 
the marketplace. All the villages surround this 
marketplace. I have been there, and it’s quite 
a clean marketplace where you buy whatever 
you need, whatever supplies you need, or sell 
whatever you have. It’s mostly food exchanged 
for money. The people in the villages usually 
made their own clothing with fabric imported 
from the city, like Canton. They have a 
community well there, no running water. The 
well is in the village center and is for all the 
residents of the village. 

The last nephew my father brought over 
was Richard, Dr. Richard. He had a very 
promising career in medicine. He went 
through medical school and graduated from 
Johns Hopkins. He had an American wife 
whom he married while he was interning in 
Baltimore. They had a child, Richard Jr. Dr. 
Richard’s mother, who had escaped to Hong 
Kong when the communists overran China in 


the 1940s, wanted him to have a Chinese wife, 
so he divorced his American wife and went 
back to China and married a Chinese wife, 
Amy, and had quite a few daughters and a son. 
His daughters were named, I think, Dorine, 
Eileen, Doris, Iris, and Maybelle. This was 
in Dung Shan. They escaped to Hong Kong 
when the Japanese war came in the 1930s, and 
the Japanese had a price on his head. All his 
daughters were educated at universities in the 
United States and are living here. He had had 
a clinic in Hong Kong and did very well as a 
chest surgeon, specializing in tuberculosis. 
And then the Japanese overran Canton, and 
then the communists came, so he remained 
in Hong Kong after escaping from the 
Japanese. The Japanese wanted him to return 
to Canton to practice medicine, and he didn’t. 
He was a brilliant chest surgeon. He came 
to America many times to attend medical 
conventions and kept in contact with some 
of his colleagues. He was very well known 
in Hong Kong, and I understand that he was 
asked to go back to Communist China to 
treat VIPs in the communist regime and was 
granted safe passage both ways if he would 
come. I think he did go in and treat the VIPs 
in Communist China and returned to Hong 
Kong, but even though they begged him, he 
wouldn’t set up a practice in Communist 
China. He retired several years ago when 
his wife had a stroke, and he brought her to 
America for therapy. About a year ago he 
passed away on his eighty-ninth birthday, I 
think, in Tempe, Arizona. Amy is still living. 

My father brought number two brother’s 
oldest son with him when he came to the 
United States. His name was Bing Eng, and he 
was about my father’s age. He died in the early 
1900s, I think. Later on, my father brought 
two more nephews over. Number five nephew 
married in China and lived in the house that 
my father had built for him. Over time, more 



Ancestors, Childhood, Education 


5 


nephews came over. One, Soo Yuen, settled 
in Boston for awhile and then moved back 
to Seattle and had a family there of quite a 
few children. He lived to maturity and he 
died in Seattle. From our immediate family, 
there are not very many of us left, but there 
are a lot of descendants—nephews, nieces, 
grandnephews and nieces, and great-grand 
nephews and nieces. 

Now, my mother came from a family of 
wealth, and she never had to work a farm or 
anything. She was the youngest sibling. She 
had two sisters and a brother. Number one 
was a sister. The oldest sister was the kindest 
and most soft spoken woman that I have ever 
met. She took care of us when we were back 
there as tots. She even took care of my sisters’ 
children, oversaw their care and everything. 
They each had an ahma. When my sister 
escaped back to Hong Kong, she wanted my 
aunt to come to Hong Kong with her, but my 
aunt refused and said she and her daughter 
would seek refuge up north somewhere at 
a convent. After the war, my sister asked 
the Red Cross to trace my aunt, and they 
discovered that she and her daughter had died 
of malnutrition and starvation while en route 
to the convent. My mother was very saddened 
by it, because she said, “I could have given so 
much just to save them.” 

Number two of my mother’s siblings 
was a brother. I never met the brother, but I 
met the two sisters. The brother died young. 
My mother said he was a spendthrift and a 
good-for-nothing, and he lived on the family 
fortune. In those days, if you had money, if 
you were a member of the wealthy class, you 
smoked opium. Only the rich could afford it. 
He was an opium smoker and a spendthrift. 
See, my grandpa had died, and they dumped 
his silk and other merchandise, and my uncle 
was going through the family fortune real 


quick. So, when my mother had this match 
from America, she thought it was a very 
good match. She thought my father was very 
wealthy, living in the gum san, you know, 
the Golden Mountain. And he was a very 
handsome man at nineteen in the picture, so 
that is how my mother was married to my 
father. 

I remember that my mother did take 
me back to Canton province to visit my 
grandmother when I was about five years 
old. I remember her very impressive house 
full of servants, and all the rooms were built 
around a big courtyard with a fountain. It 
was very impressive. Of course, after the 
Japanese and the communists came, there 
were a lot of changes, a lot of destruction, a lot 
of confiscation. Even the wealthy lost a great 
deal. The homes were raided, and the people 
were killed, but I think my grandmother 
managed to survive to 102 years old. 

None of my mother’s siblings ever came 
to America, but one of her nephews went 
to Cuba in the 1950s. My mother had 
communication with him, but I don’t know 
anything about him. 

My mother’s brother had a daughter that 
my mother supported after his death. She sent 
money back to China. They lived through all 
the war years. They escaped from one village 
and town to another and hid during the war. 
They went into the mountains and hid. 

This niece that my mother supported had 
a daughter named Bick Chee, and Bick Chee 
has a very sad history. Bick Chee’s mother 
was a concubine. My mother didn’t want that 
marriage, but it was done in China, so she 
didn’t have any control over it. Bick Chee’s 
father had another wife. After Bick Chee’s 
mother and father died, the first wife took 
Bick Chee back to the village and decided 
she didn’t want the child, so she left her out in 
the rice field to die. Bick Chee subsequently 



6 


Lai King Chew 


was picked up by a village couple, and they 
raised her. When Bick Chee was fifteen years 
old, the stepmother, who had left the baby 
to die, comes and decides she could sell 
Bick Chee to an elderly merchant in another 
village for some paltry sum of money So 
Bick Chee ran away from the village. She ran 
to the city of Canton. She got a job working 
for the communist government in Canton at 
some defense plant or something. She met 
her husband and married at seventeen or 
eighteen. From that marriage, she had two 
sons. 

Meanwhile, we had no idea where Bick 
Chee was or what had happened to her. I 
don’t know if we even knew of her existence. 
Andrew, a nephew of her father, traced her 
through the Red Cross and found her. He told 
Bick Chee, “Do you know that you have close 
relatives in America?” 

She said, “I do?” She was too young, you 
know. She was only an infant when she was 
thrown out in the rice paddy, so she had no 
idea of her mother’s ancestors or relatives. 
Nobody ever told her anything. So she said, 
“I have relatives in America?” 

So Andrew came back and told my sister, 
“I found Bick Chee.” And he proceeded to 
tell us where he found her and how. We went 
back to China to look her up. My sister, who 
was in Canton for twenty odd years, had some 
pictures of Bick Chee’s mother taken when 
my sister was a secretary at the Ling Nam 
University. So we took those snapshots out of 
her photo album. Bick Chee had no idea what 
her mother looked like, so when we called on 
Bick Chee, she met us, and we gave her the 
photograph of her mother and other relatives. 
She was so grateful that she just cried. 

Bick Chee had a son who was about twenty 
when we discovered them. Her husband is an 
herbalist. He had escaped to Hong Kong from 
Canton during the communist regime. We 


looked him up, and he’s the one that co-wrote 
the history of Bick Chee, how she was left out 
in the rice paddy and so forth. He told us her 
history and how they met, how they worked 
together in the factory. Bick Chee worked in 
the factory and got twenty dollars a month. 
She paid four dollars for her apartment. 
Well, Bick Chee worked there so long that 
gradually she became a supervisor and had a 
grand salary of fifty dollars a month, and her 
apartment went up to eight dollars a month. 

Bick Chee has two sons, one who lives in 
New York and is married and has children. 
The other son, Keurng, is still in Canton. They 
won’t let him out. The communists won’t issue 
him a visa. 

The communists confiscated all the 
farmlands, you know. All our farmlands 
belong to the government. What they raise on 
the farmland goes to the government, and the 
government will in turn dole out so much per 
person, providing that the person worked. If 
you don’t work, you don’t get your share. So 
consequently, a lot of the older people died 
or committed suicide, because there wasn’t 
enough food for them, too. The younger 
ones that work in the fields had to share their 
allotment with the older ones that didn’t 
work. If you were caught giving your food to 
the older ones, you were punished. Then you 
lose your allotment. So when Deng Xiaoping 
came into power, he was more lenient. He 
decided that the farmers could keep one third 
of whatever they grow—rice, yams, potatoes. 
Two thirds goes to the government. With their 
one third, the farmers could trade with their 
neighbors. Suppose one neighbor grows rice, 
and the other grows yams or potatoes—they 
can exchange their produce. 

My oldest sister, Fan or Fannie, who 
was born in 1896 went back to China, and 
she married and lived in China for twenty 
years. Her husband was engaged in business 



Ancestors, Childhood, Education 


7 


in Canton. They had extensive holdings in 
Canton and Kwangsi Province. They had 
theaters and real estate, hotels and opera 
houses, and so forth and so on, which was 
later all confiscated, first by the Japanese, 
and then the communists. Fannies husband 
escaped back to the United States when the 
Japanese put a price on his head of $50,000. 
They wanted him to go back to Canton to 
run his business and the theater and so forth. 
And he refused. If he had gone back, he 
would have been considered a collaborator 
by the Chinese. Later on, my sister and her 
three children, two boys and a girl, dressed 
as peasants and escaped to Hong Kong, and 
later, back to the United States, just before 
America entered the war. I think they left on 
the last boat leaving Hong Kong. I think it 
was President Coolidge, but I’m not sure. They 
lost everything, all their holdings in China, 
in Hong Kong, in Kwangsi province, and in 
Kwangiou province—all their real estate, all 
their investments. 

I was born in Seattle, Washington, July 22, 
1909 according to the Chinese date. Chinese 
people always add on a year or two when 
you’re born. They go from the time that you 
were in conception. The midwife puts down 
whatever you say to put down. They don’t 
know. 

My father wasn’t close to his children. 
After losing two girls in infancy my parents 
had three boys in a row: Bill, Ben, and Jimmy. 
And then when I came along, since he had lost 
the two girls in infancy, my father said, “Girls 
aren’t good luck. They’re bad luck.” So he gave 
me away to somebody—I don’t know who. It 
was a family that didn’t have any children. He 
didn’t tell my mother. He just took me away. 

My mother was so incensed that she went 
and got me back and said, “Don’t you dare give 
my children away!” So, I was really the second 


daughter out of four daughters he had that 
had survived to maturity. There were seven 
children that survived to maturity. 

After me, Harry was born, and then Della. 
And then, he wanted to give Della away, too, 
so my mother told him, “If you give her away, 
I’ll take all the children away, and I’ll leave 
you.” So he didn’t dare give Della away. My 
father, in a way, was afraid of my mother, 
because she was so much younger and had 
so much more potential than he did. 

Yes, my dad was afraid of my mother, 
because at that time there weren’t very many 
Chinese women here, you know. If my mother 
had left my father anywhere, she would have 
many suitors. And so, my father was afraid 
that he would lose his young wife. It’s funny, 
too. My mother used to tell me that she heard 
my father cursing, using a swear word, and 
she told my father, “You do not use that kind 
of language in my house and in front of my 
children. If you do, you won’t find us here.” 
So thereafter, he never did swear. He never 
was rude. He was always kind, although we 
weren’t close. But I think he was afraid that 
my mother would leave him. 

After my father died, there was little 
money left, and my mother went to work 
making baskets, and she raised canaries. And 
the older boys were in their teens, and they 
were old enough to work in the fish cannery 
in Alaska, and during the season they earned 
some money, too, and that helped the family. 

My mother went to China to complete 
the sale of property in Hong Kong that my 
father had gone over to settle. She turned the 
money over to the family in the village—the 
first wife, the daughter-in-law, and the niece 
and nephew. She told them it would be very 
difficult for her to send any more money, 
so she gave them the whole amount. It was 
around four thousand U.S. dollars, and that 



8 


Lai King Chew 


was a lot of money in those days. She said, 
“Use it wisely This is to support you in the 
village.” 

My mother had met the other wife and, 
like a loyal and obedient Chinese woman, had 
accepted the situation. There was nothing she 
could do about it. She did not consider herself 
a concubine, but a wife. And the strange 
thing is, the other wife in China accepted 
her and regarded my mother’s children as 
her children, too. She had just as much to 
say about the children as our regular mother. 
I had occasion to meet her in China when 
I went back there, and she is very nice and 
considerate. She said, “This daughter is from 
America, and she’s used to a lot of things that 
we do not have here.” So, all the women in the 
village, and so forth, listened to her, because 
she was the elder in the village. And they all 
had bowed to her request that I be treated 
separately and treated well. Everybody treated 
me very well there. I couldn’t understand why 
I had so many special privileges. 

When I was a child in Seattle, there were 
very few other Chinese families. I think you 
can count on one hand the Chinese families 
that I know of. There was the Chin family and 
a couple of Marr families. There was a Woo 
family, too. I think their descendants are all 
just scattered everywhere now. 

I remember living on Washington Street, 
and I went to Mainstreet School. After that 
we moved to Sixteenth and East Jefferson. We 
bought a house that was formerly occupied by 
a Dr. Stevens. Then I went to Pacific School, 
the elementary school. After that I went to 
Garfield High School. That’s where Quincy 
Jones went to high school—and Jimmy 
Hendrix, too. 

In our home we spoke mostly the Third 
Dialect, my mother’s dialect, because she 
was home more often. And at school we 


spoke English. My mother learned English 
from watching television and listening to us, 
and also to the missionaries that visited. She 
picked up English quite easily. She knows the 
meaning of English more than she speaks it. 
On television she liked to watch musicals 
with Bing Crosby and Georgia Gibbs. My 
mother had a green thumb. She grew roses 
and gardenias. She had a lot of house plants 
and an orchard in the back yard. She grew 
peaches and plums and apples. 

In our home we did not have a Buddhist 
altar. My father did not practice religion. 
And my mother was a Christian. Her interest 
came from the Maryknoll sisters, an order of 
Catholic nuns, who had an establishment near 
her village in China. For some reason, my 
mother learned to read and write, not fluently, 
but enough, from the Maryknoll sisters. And 
they taught her a lot of other things. From 
their influence she became more or less a 
Christian, and she believes in God. In Seattle 
she sent us to Sunday school and to church 
at the Baptist Church. So we had Western 
influence, and we celebrated the holidays at 
school and church, like Easter and Christmas. 

My mother socialized with about three or 
four Chinese women. She would visit them. 
They helped each other in childbirth. The 
missionaries from the Baptist Church would 
call at the house to see if the children would 
attend Sunday school. And we did. I was 
baptized a Baptist. 

The other Chinese families—most of 
them had lots of children, also. Most of the 
Chinese men also had wives in China. They 
were married very young in China and then 
emigrated to the United States. Some of them 
never saw their spouse for decades, and some 
of them even died without seeing their spouse. 
Mostly they became residents, not citizens of 
the United States. A lot of the men married 
what you might call Sing Song girls that 



Ancestors, Childhood, Education 


9 


were imported from China to San Francisco 
as entertaining girls when they were teens. 
Finally, when they got older they were sold 
off to men as wives. 

My parents did not become U.S. citizens. 
My father was a merchant, so he traveled 
here with merchant status. But my mother 
was actually an American citizen under false 
pretenses. To bring her to America, my father 
bought the birth certificate of a young woman 
who was born in Portland, Oregon, and whose 
last name was Lee. So my mother came to 
America as the daughter of this Portland 
couple who were in China at that time. She 
was a “citizen” with a bought paper. There was 
a lot of this done in those days, because of the 
Exclusion Act. There were a lot of false entries. 

After I graduated from Garfield High 
School in Seattle in 1929 I went back to 
China intending to go to university there, 
to Yancheng University up in the north. But 
what happened is that I got ill with malaria 
and almost died. I was staying in Canton with 
my sister, and she told me, “Uh, oh. You can’t 
stay here. You’ve been sick.” So I came back 
to Seattle. 

Our house on Sixteenth Avenue and East 
Jefferson was back to back to a house where 
the Maryknoll sisters lived. I got to be friendly 
with some of the sisters, especially one sister 
who was very young, Sister Veronica. We 
started talking, and I told her what had 
happened, that I had come back from China, 
and I wanted to go on to higher education, 
but that it was expensive. So she said, “I have 
an idea. I can get you to the College of Saint 
Theresa on a scholarship. It wouldn’t cost you 
anything. Would you go there?” 

I said, “Sure.” So I went to the College 
of Saint Theresa in Winona, Minnesota, in 
1929-1930, on a scholarship, and I studied 
liberal arts. That was quite an experience, 


because I am not a Catholic. I think there 
were only two of us that were non-Catholic 
in that school, but I was accepted there. I did 
everything they did there, but it was difficult 
for me to accept their religion, because I had 
a lot of questions that nobody could answer, 
[laughter] Consequently, I didn’t stay. 

In 1931, I transferred to the College of 
William and Mary with the help of a Chinese 
man I knew in San Francisco named Kern Lu. 
I had met him in Chicago on some summer 
or Easter vacation. The Chinese colony in 
San Francisco had a telephone exchange of 
its own, which was operated by Kern Lu. 
He asked me about Saint Theresa and I said, 
“I learned a great deal at Saint Theresa. The 
sisters treated me very well. I learned how to 
sit, and I learned how not to cross my legs, 
and I learned to be a lady there. But religiously 
there were many doubts—many questions left 
unanswered.” 

So he said, “I can send you to the College 
of William and Mary.” 

I said, “In the East?” 

He said, “Yes. I know so-and-so there. 
You can go to William and Mary. They have 
a scholarship open. Would you like that?” So 
that’s how I went to William and Mary for a 
year. 

That was an entirely different experience—I 
spent a very enjoyable year there. Then I 
decided they didn’t have the courses I wanted, 
so I transferred to New York University where 
I studied interior architecture. I graduated 
from there with a Bachelor of Fine Arts in 
1935. 

In 1936 I got married to one, Thomas 
Chang, who was a graduate of MIT. He had a 
master’s in architecture. His bachelor’s degree 
was from the University of Pennsylvania. We 
went to Europe on the Normandy, and we 



10 


Lai King Chew 


spent a summer session at the Beaux Arts in 
Fontainebleau outside of Paris. Afterwards, 
we visited Germany. 

We went back to New York in 1937. We 
lived in Central Park West, and we never 
encountered any racial discrimination at 
all, all the time we were going to school and 
living in the East—not until I came to Nevada. 
And we went everywhere. We went to all the 
dances at the hotel, like Eddie Duchin at the 
Plaza, Guy Lombardo at the Hotel Roosevelt, 
and Xavier Cugat at the Waldorf, and Ozzie 
Nelson at the New Yorker. We never had any 
discrimination until we came to Nevada. And 
I couldn’t understand why that was. I couldn’t 
understand discrimination at all. 

In New York I met a lot of interesting 
people. I met people who were in business at 
Macy’s, who were in the furniture business, 
college people, artists, people from different 
countries, stage people, and people in 
the Village—Greenwich Village. A very 
interesting life, and we didn’t seem to 
have any trouble renting an apartment in 
Central Park West. I met Anna Helms, the 
actress, and I met Babe Ruth’s daughter. 
She had an apartment on East Fifth Street. 
I met Huntington Hartford in Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, with a group of students from 
Harvard and MIT. We used to sit together 
and have a chat. And at that time there were 
two boys—I can’t remember their names— 
who started a supermarket called the Piggly 
Wiggly. And later on they changed it to the 
Safeway store, I think. Huntington Hartford 
had the A & P grocery store. He didn’t seem 
very interested in the business. All he thought 
about was spending money. 

Cab Calloway had the Cotton Club at 
the Palace Royal on Broadway. It was a great 
big place run by a Chinese by the name of 
James Wong. Alice Fay was singing there, too. 
My husband had a cousin, Maya Kum Yow, 


who was married to this James Wong, the 
proprietor of the Palace Royal. Maya and her 
sister, Eileen, were dancers. Later, they had a 
group called the China Dolls or something. 
They danced in the Village and at some of the 
nightclubs in New York. I didn’t attend any of 

them, because I was going to school. There 
was much studying to do. 

A group of us students from NYU used 
to meet at the Tavern on the Green and have 
coffee or tea and have our discussion sitting 
there in the mild spring or early fall. Tavern 
on the Green nowadays isn’t what it was 

then. It was a good time to be in New York 
as a student. We went to the opera quite 
often, because a student was the nephew of 
the director of the opera. I think his name 
was Walter Damaras or something like that, 
at the Metropolitan Opera. We had seats gratis 
at that time, so we could go often. I got to hear 
all these opera stars sing—Lily Pons, Gladys 
Swarthout. We went to a lot of shows in New 
York, too. We saw The Tobacco Road and Life 
with Father, Clarence Day, and Gaslight. 

My daughter Hwa-di was born in New 
York at Doctors Hospital in New York in May 
1937. In 1939 we went back to my husband’s 
hometown, which is Vancouver, British 
Columbia. My husband was a Canadian 
citizen. We went to Seattle first. Actually, 
I was back and forth between Seattle and 
Vancouver. My son Cherky (Cherk H. Chang) 
was born in Seattle in February, 1940. In 
Vancouver we stayed with my husband’s 
family—his father and mother and sister and 
brother. It wasn’t a very happy time, because I 
had a very domineering mother-in-law, but a 
very gentle and generous, protective father-in- 
law, and that’s, perhaps, why I stayed so long. 
My mother-in-law and my husband became 
abusive. But during the time I was there, 
I became my father-in-law’s secretary and 



Ancestors, Childhood, Education 


11 


driver and a lot of things that he depended 
on. He was a contractor for labor for the 
New England Fishery in Canada at that time. 
They did a tremendous business canning 
salmon. My father-in-law also dabbled in 
greenhouse tomatoes and other vegetables 
and strawberries, too. 

Besides that, he was the president of 
the Kwo Ming Tong party in Canada, very 
well liked and very well known throughout 
Canada for his part. He was a great figurehead 
in raising charity for the party and received 
many accolades from Ti Quan Ti Silk, General 
Quan Ti Silk, for his efforts in raising funds 
for the Kwo Ming Tong party. 

I saw a picture of Batista of Cuba 
(Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar, 1901-1973) 
in his office, and I asked him about it. He 
said, “Yes. I think Batista is part Chinese. We 
correspond.” 

I say, “You do?” And I remember 
addressing an envelope to Batista in Cuba. I 
did a lot of paperwork for him. 

He sponsored a so-called nephew in 
the early days to school in Canada, and this 
nephew, Tsang Young Foo, became a VIP 
in the government. His name was spelled 
Tsang—that’s a northern version of Chang. 
In the government he became a minister of 
communication and railroad in the Kwo Ming 
Tong and the Chuki Suk’s party. Throughout 
the war Tsang Young Foo fought with 
Vinegar Joe Stilwell in the Burma Road, and 
they became friends. After the war, Tsang 
Young Foo came to the United States to find 
some medical treatment for his Parkinsons 
disease, and my father-in-law came down to 
San Francisco to see him, and subsequently, 
I came, too, as an English interpreter. This 
was around 1945 or 1946. Tsang Young Foo 
asked me to call the Presidio and ask to see 
General Stilwell. I called the Presidio and was 
informed that General Stilwell was in Arizona 


resting, recuperating from some illness, but 
I talked to General Frank Merrill, and as a 
result, Frank Merrill came to Mark Hopkins 
Hotel to see Tsang Young Foo. I came down 
to the lobby of the Mark Hopkins and saw all 
these soldiers standing at attention, and all 
the staff was amazed and didn’t know what 
was happening. So I took General Frank 
Merrill up to see Tsang Young Foo, and they 
had a conversation among themselves, and 
then General Merrill said he would inform 
General Stilwell that Tsang Young Foo was 
in the United States and had asked for him. 
Tsang Young Foo said, “If it’s possible, I hope 
that we can meet before I return to China.” 
But I don’t think it ever happened, because 
Stilwell was recuperating in Arizona. 

Shortly after that, I had a private nurse 
engaged for Tsang Young Foo, because I 
couldn’t do the massages he needed. After 
a time, he spent about a month in Glendale 
at the sanitarium there for some therapy 
massages and heat therapy. Then he returned 
to China. I haven’t heard how he fared after 
that. 

While we were in San Francisco, we stayed 
in the Fairmont Hotel on the top floor, which 
was the door leading up to the roof, what you 
might call the penthouse. At that time, it was 
only seven dollars a day. Think, what it is 
today! My daughter Hwa-di was quarantined 
with the mumps while we were there. She still 
remembers the Blum’s Shop downstairs at the 
Fairmont. She and her brother Cherky would 
run down there and charge the sundaes. 

Shortly afterwards my father-in-law died, 
and I decided that I couldn’t stay in Vancouver 
any longer, and I couldn’t live the life there. 
I couldn’t live and mature with the mother- 
in-law, so I came back to the United States. 
I couldn’t live with the abusiveness of my 
husband, so we were divorced around 1948 
or 1949. 



12 


Lai King Chew 


After my divorce, my children and I lived 
in Seattle, and I went to work. My sister Della 
and brother-in-law Chuck Jung opened a 
laundry on Pike Street which did retailing 
and wholesaling. I worked there, and my 
sister and I split a shift cashiering at Ivers 
Seafood on Broadway street. That went on 
for several years. Our laundry was called a 
Supermat. We did small hotel business and 
also retail business. We had some well-known 
people come in and out of there, too. We 
had a wrestler, Gorgeous George, and then 
we had Robert Geoffrey, the ballet dancer, 
and Steinerson, another dancer. We had the 
laundry seven years, from 1948 to 1955. 

Meanwhile, in the early 1950s I married 
Charlie Chew. We had known each other 
many years before and became reacquainted. 
He was from a very old San Francisco Chinese 
family. His father was a labor contractor for 
farmers in California—asparagus, tomatoes, 
beans, and so forth. Charlie was born in Los 
Gatos, and his alma mater was the University 
of Santa Clara. He was a Mason with the San 
Jose branch of Masons. And he was a Shriner. 
My children went to a lot of circuses. 

Hwa-di was raised in Seattle and she 
attended the University of Washington, where 
she got her bachelor’s in sociology. We were 
very surprised to find out at that time that she 
was one of the few students at the University 
of Washington who graduated before she 
was twenty. There were only fifty students, I 
think, at the University of Washington who 
had graduated by the time they were twenty. 
Hwa-di is married to Michael Brodhead, 
who was formerly a history professor at the 
University of Nevada, Reno, and they have 
two sons, Lynus and John. 

My son Cherky graduated from the 
University of Nevada with a degree in art. He 
studied under Craig Sheppard. He submitted 
a painting in a Western states artwork contest 


in 1964. Kelsey Harder, who is now teaching 
at Truckee Meadows Community College, 
also submitted his artwork. Cherky won first 
prize with his oil painting, and Kelsey won 
first prize in his category, so the two boys were 
very happy. Cherky exhibits his paintings, and 
he has sold a few. The University of Nevada 
has one of his paintings on display in their 
permanent collection. 

Cherky can’t make a living being an 
artist, so he had to go to work. He became 
a stagehand at Harrah’s. When they found 
out that he was an artist, they had him do 
some painting for the background scenery. 
Bill Harrah was very impressed with his 
artistic talent, so Cherky worked up to 
director of lighting and he’s been at Harrah’s 
over twenty-five years. Cherky is married 
to Silva, and they have a son, Christopher. 
Silva has an Armenian father and a French 
mother. Silva’s father was a well-known tailor 
and haberdasher here in Reno, the late Sam 
Besnilian (Simon “Sam” Besnilian). Silva and 
her sister Giselle were born in Lebanon. They 
came to this country to live with their father, 
who passed away a couple of years ago. Giselle 
is married to David Wilkinson. 

I don’t know too much about the illegal 
gambling in Seattle. During the war they had 
illegal gambling in the rural districts. The 
sheriff was paid off so they could operate 
American games like craps and twenty-one. 
They would have a restaurant and call it a 
nightclub. They would have gambling in the 
back. In Renton, Washington, near Seattle, 
they had a road house called the China 
Pheasant, and there was gambling in the back 
room. That was fifty years ago. My second 
husband, Charles Chew, had a card room that 
was located near the Long Acre Racetrack. I 
knew very little about it. I wasn’t interested 
in gambling. 



Ancestors, Childhood, Education 


13 


My husband worked with Hong Lew, who 
owned the China Pheasant. Hong Lew was 
the one that paid off all the sheriffs. He knew 
all the ropes, all the red tape. He knew all the 
officials that could be bribed. 

In Seattle Chinatown there was gambling 
in private clubs. A lot of them opened up as 
bars, with gambling in the back room or in the 
basement. And there was a lot of after hours 
bootleg liquor, because Washington State had 
very strict liquor laws. But I don’t drink, and 
my brothers don’t drink, so we knew very little 
about bars and what went on. 

I didn’t understand one game from 
another, but in Reno I had to learn, and I 
learned very quickly about gambling. 




_2 

The Cosmo Club: 1956-1966 


How I came to nevada is quite interesting. 
My brother-in-law was an ambassador from 
the Nationalist Chinese Government of 
Taiwan to Thailand; he was headquartered 
in Bangkok. Eddie Questa was at that time 
president of one of the Bank of America 
branches in Bangkok. My brother-in-law’s 
family and Eddie Questa’s family were 
neighbors. They lived right next door to each 
other for several years and became good 
friends. Eddie Questa came to Reno and 
became president of First National Bank here. 
My in-laws had a home in San Francisco, and 
my brother-in-law and sister-in-law knew 
Eddie quite well, so when we came to Nevada 
around 1955 on a visit, we met Eddie, and he 
suggested, “Why don’t you move to Reno?” 
My husband decided it was not a bad idea, 
so we moved. 

Reno was small then. The airport was a 
shack. You would go into a little shack, and 
then you would walk out onto the Tarmac, 
and then you climbed up on those rickety 
stairs to a plane. There were no jets then. It was 
propeller, and there was heavy turbulence. 


When we took a plane to Seattle we became 
airsick. The plane was rocking and rolling. It 
took almost three hours to get there. 

Upon arriving in Reno, we discovered 
there was discrimination here. One time my 
husband and I went to a nice little restaurant 
down on South Virginia Street. It could have 
been Eugene’s. We entered and sat down, but 
we were not served; we were totally ignored. 
All around us, the people who came in after 
us had been served. We sat there for well over 
half an hour until we realized that we were not 
going to be served, and we finally left. 

We realized that some areas outside of the 
casino row discriminated against Chinese, so 
we never again ventured any further down 
Virginia Street to any other restaurant. Or 
course, we often went to the Steak House at 
the Nugget in Sparks. The coffee shops in the 
Cal-Neva, Nevada Club, Harolds Club, and 
Harrah’s served Chinese. (Bill Harrah’s Club 
was then only a storefront on Virginia Street.) 

It was strange because while some 
merchants discriminated, others did not. 
The bankers, lawyers, Realtors and all the 



16 


Lai King Chew 


professional people were very nice to us. It was 
only on the outside areas where they did—like 
landlords, small restaurants, barbers .... I 
don’t know about other Chinese people, but 
that was our experience. That was forty years 
ago. I don’t find that discrimination now. 

As compared to Reno, Seattle was a 
bigger city and we didn’t encounter much 
discrimination there. But driving down from 
Seattle to Reno through the small towns was 
another matter. 

My husband was a Californian, an 
alumnus of the University of Santa Clara. His 
family had a business in Los Gatos and other 
areas in California. They didn’t encounter 
much discrimination because they had no 
need to venture beyond their community, 
though they occasionally ventured out for 
charity work and various meetings. My 
husband was a Mason in San Jose; he didn’t 
encounter much discrimination among 
the members of the order. He was the first 
Chinese Mason in that area. He got in there 
because his father was very well known in 
California at that time, but his father died very 
young—in his forties, I think. My husband 
didn’t continue with the Masons in Reno, 
because he was too busy getting settled. 

When we tried to find an apartment, a nice 
place to live, we couldn’t get a place. We were 
used to owning our own homes elsewhere: 
in Seattle and San Francisco, we owned our 
own homes. When we came here we decided 
we would like to rent a nice place to live, 
but we ended up living in some run-down 
place on Elko Street or somewhere. I told my 
husband, “I can’t live here. Let’s look around 
someplace else.” We did find a nicer apartment 
up on Center Street: we rented a two bedroom 
apartment from an old Greek man; he was 
very nice. We stayed there for close to two 
years and all of a sudden, the old man decided 
that he was going to retire, and he turned the 


operation of the apartment complex over to 
his son and daughter-in-law. The daughter- 
in-law was very prejudiced and decided that 
she didn’t want Orientals or blacks or anybody 
living in the complex—only whites. So she 
raised our rent to about four times what it had 
been, forcing us to leave. 

We looked around at many other 
apartments. We saw apartments on Forest 
Street—bright new ones with signs out front: 
“Apartment for Rent.” But when we went to 
look at one we were told by the manager that 
it was already rented. We went by there again 
later and the apartment was still not rented! 
We visited so many apartments and we were 
turned down because we were Chinese. 

Meanwhile, we had met a lot of nice 
people in Reno, mostly casino people. One of 
the people we met was Peter Walters, a Realtor 
who knew of a lot of new homes being built 
in Sparks. Through him, we decided to live in 
Sparks, but only temporarily. Then we figured 
at a later date, when we got more settled and 
knew Reno better, we would move back into 
Reno. 

Pete Walters was connected with Probasco, 
the builders of homes out in Sparks. I think 
we met Pete through Tom Craven and Jack 
Douglass. Through Pete, we bought the last 
house on East Fourth Street and Tasker in 
July of 1960. It was a nice little house with 
three bedrooms. Beyond us was nothing but 
farmland and in the early morning hours, 
around four o’clock, we could hear the cows 
mooing, [laughter] At that time there was no 
Florence Drake School and no other houses. 
We had very few neighbors because we were 
so isolated. Some of the other houses around 
us on Tasker were not sold yet and we were 
practically the only ones out there, but that 
suited us fine. 

Our refrigerator was bought for us by 
Virgil Smith, who was at that time at the 



The Cosmo Club, 1956-1966 


17 


Riverside. We didn’t know many merchants 
or business people, so Virgil Smith had the 
refrigerator shipped out to Sparks for us. I 
still have the sales slip for that Westinghouse 
refrigerator. It was three dollars for delivery, 
and the whole thing was under four hundred 
dollars, [laughter] Can you imagine that? And 
that refrigerator is still in use to this day. 

Oddie Boulevard was a gravel road, and 
on both sides were farms. When we drove out 
to Sparks, it looked like we were going out into 
the woods somewhere, [laughter] We moved 
there with the intention of only living there 
a short time, until we got our bearings. We 
thought wed move back in the city and buy a 
place, but that didn’t materialize. 

We had a very good social life with Eddie 
Questa, Tom Craven, and Jack Douglass, and 
some of the others that were here—especially 
Eddie Questa. He had lived in the Orient 
for so long he understood Asian people and 
the Chinese. Eddie’s household on Skyline 
Boulevard consisted of his housekeeper, 
gardener and houseboy, all Thais that he had 
brought with him from Bangkok. Tom Craven 
and his wife Margaret had a house up there, 
too. Jack Douglass has a house on Circle 
Drive. So we were kept quite busy. 

Charlie and I both had a good command 
of the English language. Maybe that’s why 
we got along so well with them. Many times 
Eddie Questa would drive Tom Craven and 
us up to have dinner at the Christmas Tree, 
or the Lancers at that time. There was no 
discrimination there. 

Soon after we moved to Nevada, my 
husband and his partner, whose name was 
Phillip Fong, looked around and decided 
they wanted to try gambling. (Fong owned 
a Chinese bakery in San Francisco and both 
he and my father were well known.) At that 
time in Reno, minorities were not permitted 


to gamble in the larger clubs, so they said, 
“How about a gambling club for minorities?” 

My husband told Eddie of his plan, and 
Eddie said, “Good! I have friends that can help 
you.” So he introduced us to Tom Craven, an 
attorney, and Charlie Cowan, who was at that 
time a member of the City Council, and Jack 
Douglass, who had the Nevada Novelty at that 
time. Tom Craven became our attorney, and 
my husband and his partner bought the Owl 
Club on East Commercial Row, across the 
street from the railroad station. The address 
was 142 East Commercial Row. It’s no longer 
there. The whole block has been torn down. It 
is now Harrah’s garage. They then got a license 
in September 1956, with the help of Tom 
Craven and Eddie Questa, and opened the 
Cosmo Club. That’s how we got into gambling. 

We had no idea what it was like. We did 
not have Chinese games, but all American 
games: keno, craps, twenty-one. We did not 
have roulette. Roulette was not popular. 

Among themselves Chinese in Reno 
played pai-gow and fan-tan, but not in the 
clubs. In larger cities they played pai-gow 
and fan-tan in the clubs, but it was usually 
illegal. You played with money on the table. 
In order to stay open, the clubs had to pay off 
the police, the sheriff, whoever is in control. 
And the reason is that they didn’t understand 
the game, so there was no way they could 
supervise it. It was illegal until much later 
when they could supervise a game, and they 
understood it more. In some of the clubs now 
they have pai-gow. They played mahjongg 
at clubs in bigger cities like San Francisco 
where there was a large market and lots of 
private clubs. A mahjongg club is like a bridge 
club. You play with chips. They did not have 
mahjongg in Reno. The Nevada Club had 
Chuck-A-Luck (or Birdcage). You play with a 
wheel and dice in a cage and bet on what dice 
come up. And the Bank Club had faro, where 



18 


Lai King Chew 


you bet with cards. Our old Henry Wu was the 
faro dealer. He was considered one of the best. 

There were six bars on Commercial 
Row—from Center Street to Lake Street. 
There was the Corner Bar, the Aggie Bar, 
the Depot Bar, the Wagon Wheel Bar, the 
Bucket of Blood, and our bar, all on the same 
street. The Aggie bar was a gathering place for 
Indians; the Wagon Wheel up the street was 
the gathering place for colored. The Depot 
Bar and the Bucket of Blood were anybody’s, 
[laughter] 

During the weekend the whole street was 
crowded with Indians and black people. The 
blacks came from California, mostly Oakland. 
They were not allowed in the clubs uptown, 
so we ran the Cosmo Bar for the blacks and 
the Indians, but of course, we didn’t keep out 
the whites—they would come in, too. 

For several years it went on like that. The 
New China Club did a colored business, too, 
but aside from that, there were no others that 
catered to blacks. The larger clubs, Harolds 
and Harrah’s, had a white clientele only. There 
was also the Golden at that time, as well as the 
Palace Club, but they were all for whites or 
light-colored people. Chinese were allowed, 
but not the colored people. I don’t know about 
the Indians, but the Indians weren’t gamblers, 
anyway; they were drinkers. 

We established ourselves at the Cosmo 
Club in October of 1956. We pondered about 
a name for the club, and they thought of 
International Club, but I said, “No, that’s too 
trite!” Then they thought of giving it a Chinese 
name, but I said, “No, let’s name it the Cosmo 
Club. Cosmo—that means sort of embracing 
all nationalities, doesn’t it?” They said OK and 
accepted it. So I named it! [laughter] 

Soon after we opened up the Cosmo 
Club, we explored the idea of opening similar 
businesses in Lake Tahoe and Las Vegas. 
We went to both places, and in Las Vegas 


we found that there were already two clubs 
catering to minorities and blacks. In Tahoe 
we found that there was a lot of resistance— 
let’s say discrimination. They didn’t want any 
Orientals there and most of all, they didn’t 
want any blacks. We figured there was a lot 
of graft. I won’t go into it, but money talks. 
In both Tahoe and Las Vegas they would 
ask you for favors for consideration. They 
would introduce us to certain people if we 
would give them consideration. For example, 
at Lake Tahoe we met a Chinese man who 
introduced us to some Caucasian fellow—I 
can’t even remember their names—and he 
told us that if we were interested, he could put 
us in contact with somebody who had some 
pull up there for $1,500. Maybe it was just a 
con game. I don’t know. We didn’t pursue that 
any further. We didn’t want to participate in 
anything like that. Otherwise, you would be 
forever in their debt. The same thing in Las 
Vegas—we met somebody. Las Vegas already 
had a Chinese club there called the El Rio 
in the black neighborhood, and it catered 
mostly to black people and ethnic people. That 
territory was controlled by the Hipsing Tong. 
Anyway, we met somebody there that said for 
a certain sum he could get us in touch with 
Floyd Lamb, or some VIP down there, and he 
could help us. But we knew it meant a payoff. 

So we gave up that idea and concentrated 
on the Cosmo Club. In Reno we could work 
in legitimate channels. We didn’t have to pay 
off anybody. We felt it was safer in Reno, 
because Eddie Questa had a lot to say there. 
He was our adviser, and he introduced us to 
Tom Craven, who at that time was an attorney, 
not a judge, and then we met Jack Douglass. 

My husband had several partners. Phillip 
Fong was one. Subsequently, I think he 
withdrew from the club as a licensee because 
of ill health. Another partner was our 
landlord, Gene Hughes, who came in for 



The Cosmo Club, 1956-1966 


19 


a short time. Gene’s father, Frank Hughes, 
owned the Pioneer Hotel, the Hole in the 
Wall Bar, and the Corner Bar. But it was 
very difficult for white people to work with 
ethnic people in that area, so he withdrew 
shortly after that. My husband then asked 
my brother James “Jimmy” Eng to become 
a licensee and help with the club. So he was 
a licensee from 1956 to 1961. [In September 
1958, father and son, Eugene and Jay Hughes, 
went into partnership with Charles Chew for 
35 percent ownership. In June 1959, they sold 
their interest to James Eng.] 

My husband died very suddenly in the 
early part of 1961, so then I became a licensee 
of the Cosmo Club and ran it until 1966. 
Before my husbands death, I just did book 
work and the payroll, but when Charlie died 
it was necessary to get a licensee, so Eddie 
Questa and Tom Craven arranged for me to 
get the license right away. I went to the City of 
Reno and I got my work permit. I think Della 
Seevers was there at the police department. I 
submitted my application with Eddie Questa’s 
and Tom Craven’s help, and I was granted a 
license. It was no problem, because I didn’t 
have a criminal background. 

At that time Charlie Cowan was the 
councilman of that ward, where the Palace 
Club and the Cosmo Club were. So Charlie 
invited me to lunch at the Palace Club. He 
said he wanted to meet the Chinese lady that 
was applying for the city license, because he 
had heard so much about her. They were all 
amazed with my command of the English 
language. I guess they had never met anybody 
like that in those days—thirty or forty years 
ago—a Chinese lady that had a command of 
the English language. They were impressed. 

I didn’t know a thing about gambling; my 
knowledge of gambling was nil. But I had a 


Chinese master teach me keno, so I wrote 
keno for a spell at Cosmo Club. I became very 
proficient at it. 

The master keno writer, Leon Foo, was a 
taskmaster. We called him Boba. Boba means 
“big uncle.” Boba ran games in California 
before coming to Reno to work for my 
husband. Charlie knew him in San Francisco. 
Boba made me write keno tickets until my arm 
was ready to come apart from my shoulder. 
I stayed there on the weekend. At that time 
keno had a limit: the maximum was a ten-cent 
ticket. Can you imagine that? Ten-cent ticket! 
I wrote over a thousand keno tickets, almost 
two thousand at ten cents a keno ticket. Boba 
said, “Good, you graduated now.” 

After I began operating the casino, all 
the sales people were very helpful and they 
helped me very much in running the casino 
that way. The liquor salesmen, the Beacon, 
Sierra Wine and Luce Brothers, taught me a 
great deal about liquor, which I knew nothing 
about at that time. I couldn’t tell the difference 
between a Scotch and a Bourbon, and they 
very painstakingly taught me. They were very 
helpful. In fact, Bill Luce sent his salesmen over 
to help me with the bar. Anyway, I was very 
naive. There were so many things going on. 

I had mostly Chinese employees, because 
they were the ones that understand keno 
better. They were old keno writers, usually 
from illegal operations in California, Oakland 
mostly, and San Francisco. We had probably 
two or three black people: a black bartender 
and two black dealers. We had one very 
colorful Chinese employee whose name was 
Harry Tong but his nickname was Pork Chop. 
Among the Chinese employees there were, 
maybe, only two that spoke English fluently; 
the other Chinese understood the games but 
their English was very limited. Pork Chop 
was one of two employees who spoke English, 
my brother Jimmie being the other one. 



20 


Lai King Chew 


Pork Chop had been some sort of a deputy 
in Portland, Oregon. When he came down 
here, he made friends with the members of 
the Reno police department, [laughter] He 
was quite a help. 

At Cosmo Club we had keno, one large 
crap table, about fourteen feet long, and we 
had two twenty-one tables. Our bar was left 
over from the Owl Club, whose bartender, 
Sal, was Mexican. We had no roulette, but 
we did have slot machines, which were put in 
by Nevada Novelty, owned by Jack Douglass 
and the Benetti brothers. Other clubs had 
their own slot machines I think, but we were 
a small club so we had Jack Douglass put in 
the machines. Nevada Novelty went in as 
a partner on the slots on a fifty-fifty basis. 
In other words, they retained ownership of 
the machines, and we split the profit. The 
machines were mostly five-cent, ten-cent, 
and twenty-five cent. I think there were ten or 
twelve machines lined against the wall of the 
Cosmo Club. Also we had a new front put in 
at the Cosmo Club with glass doors instead 
of the usual swinging, paneled doors they had 
at that time. 

Keno was our biggest game. It was really 
big during the weekend when the people 
started coming in from California. We 
arranged with Harry Chin out in the Bay area 
to have three or four buses come in on the 
weekends from San Francisco and Oakland. 
I don’t know how many keno games we ran a 
day, but it was a lot. I had fifteen keno writers 
and five extra writers during the weekend. 
And sometimes it was so crowded I couldn’t 
even get into my office in the morning. Players 
were standing out on the sidewalk reading 
the board through the window, because they 
couldn’t get into the club. 

The New China had a keno game, too. I 
was talking to them and I said, “These ten- 
cent tickets are driving me crazy!” 


They said, “How much do you write a 
shift?” 

I said, “Around five thousand dollars on 
ten-cent tickets.” We were writing ourselves 
mad. Each writer was writing over a thousand 
tickets. Ten cents a ticket—can you imagine? 
You could also buy multiples of ten—you 
could buy ten, twenty, thirty cents. We had 
three eight-hour shifts, three keno bosses. 

So, they said, “Gee, you’re writing more 
than we are. We couldn’t even get five thousand 
dollars for the whole twenty-four hours.” 

There were many bars besides us along the 
street from Center Street to Lake Street, one 
block on East Commercial Row. Right next 
to us on Commercial Row was the Corner 
Bar, and then next there was the Hole in the 
Wall Restaurant, then Gus’s Place, where you 
could get a meal for thirty-five cents. When 
one of our customers went broke, I would tell 
him, “OK, tell Gus to give you dinner.” Then 
on the weekend I would settle with Gus for 
maybe a couple of dollars worth of dinners. 
Thirty-five cents a dinner—how much could 
you eat? Five or six dinners? Then there 
was a barber shop. Our Club ran from East 
Commercial Row to Douglas Alley. The front 
was Commercial Row. The back door was on 
Douglas Alley facing the back door of the 
Santa Fe Hotel. People could go in and out 
the back door. On Lake Street there was also 
a little Filipino restaurant run by a Filipino 
woman. In back of the Santa Fe Hotel was the 
Greyhound Bus Station. 

One day I discovered that there were 
tunnels under the club and under Douglas 
Alley. We had a plumbing stoppage, and I 
called a young plumber. He said, “I have no 
idea where the trap or anything else is, but I 
know who does.” 

It was just an old building. He gave me 
the name of an old plumber, and I called him. 



The Cosmo Club, 1956-1966 


21 


He had a place on Broadway. He came down 
and said, “Oh, I know these places well. The 
plumbing is here, there. I’ve been down here 
all along these stores lots of times.” He knew 
exactly where the connections in the traps 
were. 

So I went downstairs to the basement with 
him. It was the first time I had been down 
in the basement. I couldn’t believe it—there 
were tunnels down there! I said, “My heavens, 
where does it go?” Evidently it ran through 
other stores’ basements. 

I happened to mention this to old Henry 
Wu. Henry said they were dug to a height of 
six or seven feet and wide enough for a person 
to walk through very comfortably. Henry said, 
“I remember this place. Those tunnels used to 
be for escapees. When the place was raided 
for drugs or gambling, people would escape 
through the tunnel.” 

I said, “Where does it lead?” 

He said, “It goes straight over to so-and- 
so’s place.” I don’t remember what store it 
was. I never followed the tunnel all the way, 
because it was just too spooky. It went all the 
way under our club, and I presume it went 
all the way under Douglas Alley, too. The 
tunnels were dug in the early 1900s, 1920s, 
I presume. That whole block is Harrah’s 
garage now. All those bars are gone—the 
hotel, everything. 

Around the corner and across Lake Street 
was the New China Club, run by Bill Fong. 
They were in Reno before us—in 1952,1 think. 
Bill Fong was the first one there. He had the 
New China Club with a bar and a restaurant. 
It was quite a large place. He catered to 
blacks, the Indians, the Hispanics—the ethnic 
groups. Then we came, and he more or less 
resented our being there, but there wasn’t 
anything he could do, because we obtained 
our license legally through Tom Craven, 
as our attorney, and Eddie Questa, as our 


advisor. We didn’t bribe anybody. We went 
through legal channels. 

Next to him was a hotel—a flophouse, 
really. I don’t remember the name. [Toscano 
Hotel] It was a men’s hotel. Next to that men’s 
hotel was the Mint Club. There was a group 
of Chinese under a California Chinese man 
named Joe Yip, who opened the Mint Club. 
His background in California was very 
colorful. He was engaged in several illegal 
operations. I understand there was a murder 
involved, but he was never convicted of it. 
It was never proven. He evidently found 
another partner who was Italian, A1 Figoni, 
who got the license. Joe Yip was not allowed 
to work there. He became a silent partner. It 
is a rumor—I don’t know if it’s true—that he 
paid $25,000 to one of the Gaming Control 
Board members for favorable approval. For 
some reason or other, they lost money there. 
I think they just stole the money. It didn’t last 
very long. They closed up and left town. 

The Harlem Club on Douglas Alley was a 
small bar with a black owner. It had a twenty- 
one table. It was behind the New China Club, 
near the railroad tracks. It’s gone now, but it 
was a gathering place of some of these more 
reputable black people. 

On the north side of the tracks there 
weren’t any casinos. That area used to be the 
Northside School, on Fourth Street between 
Lake and Center Street. Then it became a 
parking lot for Harolds Club, and now it is 
the National Bowling Stadium. 

In that same area of Lake Street and 
Commercial Row was Kiah Lumpkin’s little 
restaurant called Kiah’s Squeeze Inn. It was 
like a hole in the wall. It just had a few stools, 
and its specialty was its famous spareribs. 
(Kiah’s Squeeze Inn opened on Lake Street 
and Commercial Row in 1962 and moved 
to Virginia Street in 1967, across from the 
Eldorado Hotel and Casino, where it operated 



22 


Lai King Chew 


until 1983, when Kiah Lumpkin opened Kiah’s 
Cafe at the Golden Reef Hotel on Fourth 
Street. He died in 1992.) Then on Center 
Street there was the Golden Hotel and the 
Bank Club. But the Golden Hotel burned 
down in 1962. 

When we came here, Harrah’s Club was 
just one storefront on Virginia Street. And 
there was another club, the Frontier Club. It 
was later absorbed by Harrah’s Club. It was 
next to the First National Bank on the corner 
of Second Street and Virginia Street. Then, 
Harrah expanded over to the alley and took 
in the Bank club and the Golden Hotel. They 
took over the corner of Center and Second. 
The Horseshoe Club came later. It was across 
the street. And there was the Colony Club that 
Harrah’s took over on the corner of Virginia 
and Douglas Alley. Douglas Alley went all the 
way through from Virginia to Center to Lake 
Street. There was the Archway Drugstore and 
Tom Wong’s Banker’s Cafe. On the corner was 
the Sierra Turf Club. We used to go there and 
buy the most delicious pastrami sandwich 
on rye. 

Also in Douglas Alley was Harolds Club’s 
Kiddie Movie Theater. Later on Harolds Club 
bought all that property there, the Bank Club, 
the Archway Drugstore, the Sierra Turf Club, 
with the intention of building a hotel, but I 
guess Pappy died, and it never materialized. 

Gray Reid Department Store was where 
Circus Circus is now on Virginia Street and 
Sixth Street. Gray Reid had a restaurant in it, 
a little cafe. There was a tire shop across the 
street, Rissone’s. They had several locations, 
but they were sold or went out of business. 
They had a Shell station and Mission Tires. 
Where the Silver Legacy is now was the Sewell 
Market, which later became the Mayfair 
Market. Up Commercial Row, west of Virginia 
Street to Sierra Street, at that time there was 
the Rauhut Bakery, the Mikado Laundry, and 


a fish market, too. On Virginia near Fourth or 
Fifth, they had a Welsh’s Bakery. That’s where 
the Eldorado is now. We used to smell the 
bread being baked there. Later, that was the 
site of the Little Wall, Little Waldorf. Further 
down Virginia Street there was the Waldorf 
Restaurant, Joseph Magnin’s, and Armanko 
Bookstore. Further down was an archway or 
arcade; you would take an elevator up, and 
there was an attorney’s office, and my dentist 
was up there, too, Dr. Harold McNeil. Dr. 
Clark, the eye doctor was up there. That’s all 
gone now. Joseph Magnin’s moved down to 
Parklane Mall, and the Armanko closed up. 
Waldorf moved. 

There was Frank Moore’s Shoe Store 
on Second Street, where Cal-Neva is now. 
There was another shoe store and Morris’s 
Jewelers. There was a shoe store on First 
Street—Lloyd Gauchi’s. There was a beauty 
school downtown on Second Street, where the 
Imperial Palace Chinese Restaurant is now. 

We used to go to the Grand Cafe on 
Second Street for lunch, and we used to have 
lunch at the Coach Room in the Mapes. We 
had dinner at the Riverside. Sarah Vaughan 
performed there. Paul Anka performed 
there when he was a teenager—eighteen or 
nineteen. I remember hearing him. He was 
a little kid! He wasn’t allowed to gamble or 
anything. At that time, Virgil Smith and Jack 
Douglass bought into the Riverside. 

Nobody was excluded from the Cosmo 
Club—no particular race—but our clientele 
was mostly the colored people and the 
Indians. Occasionally, we had Asians and a 
very small percentage of Caucasians, I would 
say. 

Blacks were great players of keno and dice, 
especially keno. I think their interest in keno 
stemmed from the fact that in California— 
Oakland and San Francisco, mostly—the 



The Cosmo Club, 1956-1966 


23 


Chinese used to operate keno behind closed 
doors, [laughter] It wasn’t legal, but they did 
have keno behind closed doors. So the Blacks 
knew keno. The blacks liked craps, too. We 
had so many keno players in our club that they 
would stand outside on the sidewalk to read 
the keno board. During the weekend, I would 
say, we had 98 percent colored people. We had 
very few Chinese; they played uptown, mostly. 

Keno has an interesting history. It got 
started among the coolies and miners that 
came over from China to the United States. 
I’ve never heard of it being played in China, 
but it was played wherever there was a 
Chinese community on the West Coast: 
Seattle, Portland, Oakland, San Francisco, and 
Vancouver, British Columbia, too. But it was 
illegal in every sense of the word. The keno 
runners were like numbers runners. They’d go 
from a grocery store here to a laundry there. 
They’d collect the money from the players and 
take it back to their little headquarters. There 
would be one game in the morning and one 
in the evening. It took a little while for the 
runners to collect all of the tickets, you know. 

The eighty numbers on the keno ticket 
were in Chinese characters representing a 
proverb. I remember the characters consisted 
of heaven, the sun, the moon, the water, the 
fire, the earth. I’m not versed enough to know 
what that proverb was, but people bought 
the tickets and picked out the characters for 
some event. They would select characters 
to represent some occurrence in their lives. 
The tickets were usually ten cents back then, 
and they had a table of winnings. Usually, 
they played ten numbers, and the limit on 
winnings was maybe $2,000 or $5,000. 

The characters were written on papers, 
all folded up in round tubes, and they would 
shake it up and divide it into four twenties 
and pick one group of twenty numbers. I 
don’t know exactly how they figured out 


the payoff. They marked the tickets with a 
Chinese calligraphy brush. Just like you would 
have a pen and pencil in your house today, at 
that time every Chinese family had a brush 
and ink pad. 

When keno came to Nevada, the characters 
became eighty numbers. The players would 
mark their tickets with blue ink—it looked 
like laundry blueing. You would take your 
ticket to the counter, and then the keno writer 
marked your ticket with black ink. Then, he 
would number the ticket. He would take your 
blue ticket, which was called the inside ticket, 
and give you the ticket he marks with black 
ink. That’s your ticket—the outside ticket. 
When you would win, you would bring your 
black ticket to the counter, and they would 
match it with your original blue ticket. That’s 
how they would decide whether you won or 
lost. 

The Chinese people used to believe in 
good luck in gambling. In our club we had a 
small altar to bring good luck. The pit bosses 
used to come in and light some incense. We 
also had a tiger and a statuette of one of the 
fighters, Kwan-gung, who was one of the early 
warlords. I didn’t believe in this, but the pit 
bosses did, so I let them do whatever they 
wanted. It didn’t hurt anything. They had their 
little quirks, [laughter] 

There were some very nice black people 
who used to come into the club. One of the 
couples was Jimmie and Homer. They were in 
the news some time ago about raising a little 
white girl. Jimmie was a lady who worked at 
the Riverside Hotel. She was approached by 
some woman from San Francisco who gave 
her a little white child, whom Jimmie ended 
up raising. Homer worked for the city of 
Reno with a road crew. She and Homer would 
come into the club quite often after work. 



24 


Lai King Chew 


Their favorite drink was Coors beer and they 
played keno. 

I also remember there was a young black 
sailor that came into the Cosmo Club in the 
late 1950s or early 1960s. He told me that 
he was a cook, and he said he liked to read. 
He didn’t gamble very much, but he wanted 
to see what it was like, so he’d come in with 
some others. He said, “I read a great deal and 
I write a lot of letters for different shipmates. 
I don’t do much, but I do like to read.” I often 
wondered if that wasn’t Alex Haley. 

The white men who came in were mostly 
locals. They were slumming. They were 
looking for prostitutes. They were well-known 
local people. Some are still around. I won’t 
mention their names. They would stay at the 
Mapes or the Golden, and they would give 
me their hotel keys. And then, Smitty or the 
bartender would tell them, “Hey, mister, this 
lady owns this club. She’s not one of those.” 
[laughter] 

And Bob Starr used to say, “Hey, mister, 
she’s not one of those. She owns this club.” 

North of the club was the Santa Fe Cafe and 
Hotel, which catered to the Basque people and 
the sheep-herders. When we first had Cosmo 
Club we used to get a few sheepherders when 
they came down from sheep herding around 
November and December. They would spend 
the winter in town around the Santa Fe Hotel; 
the Santa Fe had lockers in its basement for 
them to put their gear. It was very interesting. 
But gradually, after the blacks and the Indians 
started coming in, the sheepherders didn’t 
come in anymore. 

Ordinarily, we had three employee 
shifts: the day, the swing, and the graveyard 
shifts. We had around thirty employees; on 
weekends we had as many as forty. We had 
weekend help in keno—at one time we had 


as many as fifteen keno writers because it was 
the main game of the people coming in from 
California. They mostly came from Oakland 
and San Francisco and outlying small towns. 
After a time we established a relationship with 
a Chinese tour company in San Francisco 
and they began sending us customers on the 
weekends by the busload. 

During the times when people came by 
the busload, I would get up at four o’clock 
in the morning and I would be down at the 
club about five o’clock and I couldn’t even 
get into the Cosmo Club. The keno tickets 
were thrown away knee deep—I had to wade 
through all that to get into the office. There 
were so many people standing outside of the 
club to watch the keno board. At that time we 
had ten-cent keno with a five thousand dollar 
maximum. (Uptown it was ten thousand.) 
We had a ten-cent crap table, too. We had to 
have two dealers and a box man on the table 
because there was too much play on it. [A 
boxman sits on a low chair directly behind the 
drop box at a dice table to observe all action 
on the craps table and verify all payoffs and 
money transactions.] We had a fourteen-foot 
crap table, and I tell you, if you weren’t faster 
than the players, they’d up their bets and run 
if they lost it! [laughter] So you just had to 
bring it in as fast as the seven came out. I 
tried to be a box man sometimes, but it got 
too much—I don’t know how many times I 
fell into the crap table, so finally I gave it up 
and had somebody else do it. It was just too 
much! [laughter] 

We had no trouble at all with our patrons at 
the club. We treated them like human beings, 
so we got along very well. Like everybody 
else, they had their likes and dislikes, their 
problems, but they weren’t magnified and we 
got along very well. I can’t say that we trusted 
all of them, [laughter] but they seemed to 



The Cosmo Club, 1956-1966 


25 


trust us. They were very cordial, very nice. 
They didn’t misbehave, generally speaking, 
and they did not take advantage of us. We 
helped them out personally from time to time. 
They’d come to us with all kinds of problems: 
marital problems, family problems .... And, 
of course, we contributed to their charities, 
too. And when any individual was down and 
out, we bought them their meals, we gave 
them fare to go home—that was all good will. 

My customers looked out after me; they 
were my bodyguards. They wouldn’t let 
anything happen to Mrs. Chew! [laughter] 
A strange thing: my car would be parked 
downtown and all the cars around there 
would be ripped off except mine, [laughter] 
That’s because they would always say, “Leave 
that alone; that belongs to Mrs. Chew!” That 
was quite a family of protectors I had down 
there. They would always see that I walked 
to my car safely. Occasionally, there would 
be a few drunks, but they would always be 
put in their place. I had two self-appointed 
bodyguards who tried to keep order for me. 
Freddie Hines was from Oakland. And Smitty 
was local. He was one great, big, black man, 
a construction worker who moved heavy 
equipment. He was very, very strong. Smitty 
was a very kind old soul, a gentle giant—when 
he was sober, that is—but when he was drunk, 
Lord help us! When he was drunk I’d usually 
have my bartender cart him upstairs to rent 
one of the rooms at the Pioneer Hotel above 
us and let him sleep it off. 

Smitty would sit outside near the train 
station and watch what went on. He always 
saw that I got to my car safely, and when I’d 
leave my car, he would escort me around the 
area. That area was not safe for any strangers 
to be in—Commercial Row and Lake Street. 
You can get mugged on the street, if you’re 
a stranger there. He and Freddy Hines and 
ever so many others were very, very kind to 


me and very protective. I had no fear because, 
generally, it went around in the neighborhood 
who I was and what I did. And I settled their 
fights, too—they minded me like children! It 
was quite interesting, like a great big family. 

One time we went on a shopping spree in 
San Francisco, and when we came back the 
car trunk was so full it wouldn’t open. But I 
had someone who was skilled at picking locks 
and so forth, an ex-convict, and he didn’t have 
any trouble opening it. [laughter] 

Another time our dog, Godfree, was 
stolen. The gate was left open, and we missed 
the dog for several days, and I kind of had a 
hunch it was stolen by the garbage collectors, 
so I let it be known among the Cosmo clientele 
that I wanted my dog back. “Whoever has it, 
let the dog go. No questions asked. I want my 
dog back.” 

And next thing I know, the dog is running 
around in the neighborhood. And then some 
Caucasian man picked up the dog, but the 
radio people heard about it and said, “That’s 
a dog that has been advertised as missing!” 

So, I think Cherky went down to the 
radio station with Kelsey to claim the dog. 
The other man claimed the dog was his, but 
the minute they got in there, Godfree jumped 
on Cherky and Kelsey. The radio people said, 
“Well, we know who owns this dog.” So they 
got Godfree back. 

But Commercial Row and Lake Street was 
the most vicious corner. There was the Corner 
Bar there, doing a lot of illegal business. 
One time the owner had somehow or other 
encouraged a whole group of University of 
Nevada students down to the bar, and every 
weekend they would come down here, and 
these poor kids would get mugged, beaten up, 
and the kids got drugs to sell at the university. 
They would come down in groups, and they 
were badly, badly hurt. They used to come 



26 


Lai King Chew 


into the Cosmo Club to gamble, and I had 
to check their I.D., and most of them were 
underage—nineteen and twenty. I’d throw 
them out. Then they were at the Corner Bar 
getting drunk, using drugs, or recruited to 
sell drugs. It happened for quite a few months 
until, all of a sudden, I think the police 
department complained to the university. I 
happened to mention it to Judge Craven, “I 
sure don’t like to see all the university kids 
getting hurt down here.” 

And they were not black kids; they were 
white kids that came down there. I know 
they were getting beat up, rolled, and robbed. 
They were drunk. I think the police were 
called many times. Finally, the university put 
that area off limits to students. If they were 
caught down there, they would face expulsion 
from the university. So that cleaned up their 
rendezvous. 

When we first set up business there, a 
policeman named Eddie came around and 
asked for forty dollars a week, [laughter] So 
we took the forty dollars up to the police chief, 
Ted Berrum. He, of course, said that there was 
no such thing, that it was not demanded by 
the police department, [laughter] Next thing I 
knew, Eddie didn’t patrol that area any longer. 
But we seldom called the police, because we 
hardly ever had any trouble down there. The 
people, generally, behaved very well in the 
casino. We had no one at the club who was 
specifically there for security purposes, either; 
we didn’t need it. We, ourselves, policed it very 
well. We mostly always stopped arguments 
and fights before they ever began. If I heard 
any loud voices, then I was there! We always 
had coffee there for the people who wanted it, 
and usually the customers minded me. 

Occasionally, there were disturbances 
in the club, but not often. Sometimes 
troublemakers would run from outside 


into the club, waving guns or knives. It was 
impossible to stop them, but then Smitty and 
some of the other blacks would stop them and 
push them outside the door. 

Outside on Commercial Row, it was a 
different story, though. It was like a battlefield: 
they had fights; they had killings and drunks. 
You name it—they had it! Every morning 
about six o’clock the paddy wagon rolled 
down the street and picked up all the drunks 
and threw them in like logs. During the 
wintertime when it was so cold, you’d find 
drunks on top of the hood of your car or 
underneath the car where it was warm. 

Every Monday morning or even on 
Sunday, if I went out into the alley in back 
of our Cosmo Club, I’d see all these empty 
wallets lying around, [laughter] They were 
from the pickpockets! There were tons of 
empty wallets all over the alley. 

On the streets there was good deal of illegal 
activity in and around the neighborhood. 
There were drugs being sold. I have no idea 
of what kind, but I know drugs were being 
sold, and once it happened in our club. Several 
very well-dressed women started coming 
down to the club. They’d sit at the bar and 
order a drink. I thought it was strange when 
they started coming down quite frequently 
for a spell. Then I noticed that somebody 
in the neighborhood would make certain 
exchanges, and then they’d leave, [laughter] 
Naive as I was, I had no idea what was going 
on. Later, I realized they were selling drugs 
in my place! So I contacted James—he was 
the one that was selling the drugs—and said, 
“Look here, I don’t want any more of this in 
the club here. You either stop it, or else I will 
turn you over to Manning.” (Robert Manning 
at that time was in the narcotics division; he 
was in plainclothes.) “OK, Mrs. OK. I won’t do 
it!” Thereafter we didn’t have any more ladies 
that came down to the bar. 



The Cosmo Club, 1956-1966 


27 


Very often on weekends there would be 
several station wagons of very young women 
coming in from the Bay Area. I presume they 
were prostitutes. Some of them became very 
familiar at the club, and as long as they drank 
and gambled somewhat, and as long as they 
didn’t solicit in the club, I allowed them to 
stay. They solicited anywhere on the streets, 
in the clubs, bars, hotels—anywhere around 
that area on Lake Street. But I wouldn’t allow 
it in the club, and they all knew it. [laughter] 
But quite often there were Caucasian people 
slumming in that area and they would get 
drunk and get rolled. I know those things 
happened, [laughter] I won’t mention names, 
but some of them were business people in 
town. 

One time there was an out-of-towner 
from the East who was drunk and had lost 
his wallet. His wallet contained quite a bit 
of money, but he was most anxious to get 
his identification back—he did not want any 
publicity. So one of the cops came down and 
asked me about it. I said, “Oh, he wants his 
wallet back. He said he doesn’t care about 
the money, but he wants his wallet back.” 
The man was offering a two hundred dollar 
reward with no questions asked, so the cops 
put out the word, and I, too, let it be known. 
That same night the wallet was returned and 
no questions asked, [laughter] 

There was trafficking in stolen goods in 
the neighborhood; you could buy almost 
anything: a TV, clothes, appliances, cigarettes, 
meat, lobster .... No delivery truck was 
ever safe in that area. If you left your door 
unlocked, the contents were gone! [laughter] 
One truck carrying a load of nylons even had 
its contents stolen, and some women came by 
the club selling nylons at twenty cents a pair. 
One of the police came in and asked me, “Will 
you buy a pair of nylons for me, so we can see 
if they are the same kind that were stolen?” 


I said, “You want me to buy stolen goods?” 
Sol bought a couple of pairs and they were the 
same ones, but by then they had gone through 
so many hands, how could they know who 
the culprit was? 

Then a motel that was being built up on 
North Virginia Street had some TVs stolen 
before they were installed. Next thing I knew, 
TVs were on sale on Commercial Row for 
forty dollars. The strangest part of it was, these 
big trucks came in from California with all 
kinds of new appliances, and you could buy 
coffee pots, irons, toasters, all sorts of small 
appliances. Everything was new, still in its 
original wrappings. Every day, something 
came up. It was almost like a bazaar down 
there, [laughter] Yes, those were the days, I’m 
telling you! 

There were murders, too. Once we had a 
woman who had a stiletto knife with a very 
long, thin blade. She ran it into another person 
just outside the club, and he was dead on 
the sidewalk. We had one murder that I was 
kind of involved in because I knew the victim 
and I knew the perpetrator. The victim was 
a great big black named Tucker; he was big, 
about six-four or six-five. He was not a very 
nice person when he was drunk. He carried 
a gun, and he’d shown it to me many times. 
(I always told him to put it away.) He never 
did anything in my club, but one time he and 
a man named Cook got into a fight at the 
Harlem Club on Lake Street and Tucker took 
a knife and stabbed Cook umpteen times. 
Finally Cook got hold of Tucker’s gun and shot 
him and killed him. Cook came running into 
our club and fell down on the floor, bleeding 
all over. We called the police, and they got the 
ambulance and took him away. They arrested 
him for murder, of course, and I ended up 
testifying in court. Cook’s public defenders 
were Jerry Whitehead and A1 Osborn. The two 
of them came down and questioned us about 



28 


Lai King Chew 


the murder, and we told them what we knew 
I ended up in court to identify the gun with 
the white handle that was used to kill Tucker. 
Later Cook went to prison for manslaughter, 
I guess. He sent word to me from prison 
to thank me for helping him when he was 
bleeding and injured, [laughter] A lot of my 
former customers who were in the state prison 
in Carson City would often tell their fellow 
inmates who were being released, “When you 
get out, be sure and say hello to Mrs. Chew.” 
That was my clientele down there, [laughter] 
It was rough, I’m telling you. 

Another time there was a woman who 
went amok and she was waving a great big 
knife and a pistol around. I think she was 
drunk and angry about something. I tried 
to stop her and she wouldn’t be stopped and 
came after me. I ran out in the street and 
saw a paddy wagon up at the corner near the 
Wagon Wheel, so I ran up and two cops were 
standing there. I told them to come down 
and give me a hand to subdue this woman, 
but the policemen said they were busy. And 
they were standing around doing nothing! I 
told them someone was sure to get killed, and 
they said, “Well, we’ll come down later.” There 
were one or two other incidents when we 
called the police, and it took them about three 
quarters of an hour to get there, but when I 
really needed them, I ran up the street to call 
them. So, this time I went back into my office 
at the club. Meanwhile, Smitty and some local 
people had subdued this woman, slapped her 
down, and took the knife away from her, and 
her husband came and took her away. I was 
so upset and annoyed with the two policemen 
that I picked up the telephone and called Chief 
Briscoe. I was angry! I told him who I was, 
and he said, “I know who you are.” 

I told him I wanted to come up and see 
him right then! I ran over to the police station 
and laid my complaints on Chief Briscoe’s 


desk and asked him, “Do you know that your 
policemen were too busy when I asked them 
to come down and give me a hand? Too busy! 
People could have been killed, and they were 
too busy!” I asked him, “What’s the matter? 
Am I a stepchild of the police department?” I 
was so mad that I just told Chief Briscoe what 
I thought of his department. 

The next day, Manning and Marvin and 
some of the other policemen came down from 
the plainclothes division and asked, “Mrs. 
Chew, what did you do?” 

I said, “What did I do?” 

They said, “The chief got us all together 
and chewed us out.” 

I said, “Good!” 

I think they often didn’t come when I 
called, because I had no restaurant to cater 
to them. Bill Fong catered to them with free 
food and drink. They had their dinner and 
lunch there, and had their drink after work 
at the bar. We didn’t cater to any of that. And 
we never paid that policeman, Eddie, when he 
came around asking for forty dollars a week. 
So, I guess we weren’t in good standing with 
some of the police—not all of them—but 
some of the police, because we had nothing 
to offer them. But after the chief chewed them 
out, they were very attentive. 

We had cheaters at the club but usually we 
spotted them before they could do too much 
damage. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, 
we had The Professor, who was a very well- 
known card counter. He had been barred from 
all the clubs in Reno. He came into the Cosmo 
Club, in disguise: he had horned-rimmed 
glasses, wore a suit and a porkpie hat; he was 
very well dressed. He came to play twenty- 
one, but we spotted him. We let him play for a 
while, and he didn’t win or lose, and I guess he 
was probably aware that we had spotted him. 
He stayed in the area about two days, and the 



The Cosmo Club, 1956-1966 


29 


next day, when he came around again to play, 
we just told him that we weren’t going to deal 
to him, that he couldn’t play here anymore. 
We called up Harolds Club and told them that 
The Professor was in town, so the whole town 
was alerted, [laughter] He was barred from 
all the clubs uptown, so he thought he would 
try downtown. He would appear in various 
disguises: sometimes he would be dressed 
like a lumberjack with boots and a jacket, or 
he’d come in as a cowboy, but one look at his 
hands and you knew that he was not a truck 
driver or a construction worker or a rancher. 

The Professor had a fantastic memory; 
he remembered the cards dealt. Our dealers 
never dealt to the last card—maybe a third of 
a deck or a half of a deck, and then they would 
shuffle. But if you dealt to the last card in the 
deck, he would win the money. I think he 
played in Vegas, too. (Of course, there wasn’t 
Atlantic City at that time.) He became very 
well-known in the state, [laughter] 

We had other cheaters, too. We had 
cheaters that marked—daubed—the cards. 
Then we had people that crimped the 
cards. We had a couple—I think they were 
Hispanic—who came in to play twenty-one. 
I was watching them, and I said, “Something 
doesn’t look right.” So we changed the deck, 
and I took the deck into the office and checked 
the cards and noted that a lot of cards were 
missing, [laughter] I think they realized that 
they’d been spotted, so they left and went next 
door to Kiah’s to have dinner. At my request, 
a policeman followed them into Kiah’s. I 
said, “Shake them down!” He did, and all the 
picture cards fell out. [laughter] So they were 
arrested for cheating. 

Most of the time we simply asked people 
to leave, because, unless you had them on 
camera, you couldn’t accuse them of cheating, 
and we didn’t have cameras. We would just 
close the table and say, “That’s it,” and they’d 


leave. Then, usually, they’d move uptown to 
the bigger clubs to see if they could get away 
with it there, but we usually did each other 
the favor of notifying one another. 

We had one black man named Tex 
in our club who doctored a keno ticket, 
[laughter] He thought he could get away 
with it, but we didn’t have an inside ticket 
for him in the first place. At that time, the 
keno writers wrote outside tickets in black 
ink. There was quite a bit of confusion and 
commotion at that time. Somehow or other 
this man managed to reach over, and he stole 
a brush full of black ink from one of the keno 
writers and doctored a ticket on top of the 
blue inside ticket, and he had claimed that 
he won at keno. [laughter] The keno writer 
said, “I didn’t write that ticket. That’s not my 
writing.” All the keno writers had their own 
characteristics when they made their brush 
strokes—just like penmanship. So he got 
an attorney and came down and demanded 
payment. They brought a member of the 
gaming board in. The ticket was so doctored 
and so amateurish that anybody could see it 
was doctored. I said, “This ticket is doctored. 
We have no inside ticket with that marking 
on it. No inside ticket.” I held the ticket up 
and I said to his attorney, Stan Brown, “Do 
you think this is a legitimate ticket? Take a 
look at it.” 

He held it up and said, “No.” He said to 
Tex, “You can’t collect on that ticket.” Tex 
made quite a commotion. Later, Tex went to 
the Cal-Neva and pulled the same trick. He 
caused a commotion over there, and then 
Warren Nelson got hold of me, and I told 
him Tex had tried the same thing at our club. 
People like Tex thought they could get away 
with cheating, but they didn’t know there was 
so much checking in the system. 

We called our attorney down—Clark 
Guild. He said, “What happened? 



30 


Lai King Chew 


I told him, “Cal Neva just called me up, 
and they had the same thing happen over 
there.” 

So, Warren Nelson told this Tex guy, “You 
try that over there? Now you come over here 
and try it? You think we’re fools?” 

Stan Brown refused to take the case. Tex 
never got paid. And Warren Nelson told Tex, 
“If you try this stunt again and try to harm this 
little lady and come over to my club and try 
this again, I’ll find the biggest butcher knife, 
the longest one, and run it through you.” And 
that was the end of him. 

At the Cosmo Club, we sometimes cashed 
checks for people. Sometimes the welfare 
recipients from California would bring their 
welfare checks in for me to cash, but I advised 
them not to bring them into the clubs to cash, 
because the welfare of their families is not for 
gambling. Thereafter, no one brought welfare 
checks in. 

One time someone tried to cash a stolen 
paycheck from Emeryville, California. The 
man looked legitimate, so I asked him for his 
I.D., and he presented a wallet with some I.D., 
which had the same name as on the check. 
So I asked him to endorse the check, but he 
signed his own name on the check. I turned 
around and said, “You stole this check, didn’t 
you?” And he grabbed it and ran out the door. 

We had another woman come in and 
cash a couple of payroll checks from some 
eatery in California. It was a quite well-known 
place, and I cashed her checks, but they were 
returned to me by the bank as stolen checks. 
Very shortly after that she evidently stole the 
payroll checks from this company and cashed 
them at various places. One day, then, the 
D.A. from Oakland asked me to appear there 
in court to identify this woman as a forger 
of the checks. They flew me to Oakland, and 
I testified that she was the one for whom I 


had cashed the checks, and then they flew 
me back. 

There was another case where a man 
came in, and he was a good forger, too. On 
the American Express travelers checks you 
have a name on top, and then you have to sign 
your name again to cash the check. I looked 
at the signature; it was pretty good—almost 
identical. This man was a good forger. Abe 
Farrell of the Reno Police Department called 
me up and asked me about the stolen checks. 
I said, “Yes, I did cash one. There was a great 
big black fellow that came in with a book of 
them.” So there was always something going 
on; always something. Those were just some of 
the problems we had—it’s all part of gaming. 

One time I was called to the police station, 
because they had arrested a Chinese woman 
who happened to be the wife of one of my 
dealers. His name was Leon Fong. His wife 
had been arrested because she was chasing 
after a bunch of neighborhood kids with a 
cleaver. In the police holding cell she was 
violent and screaming and fighting off the 
police. They couldn’t make her settle down, 
so they couldn’t keep her there, because she 
was batting around—they were afraid she 
was hurt. I couldn’t get her to calm down 
to tell me what was wrong or anything. She 
was screaming and crying. So finally, we 
got an order from Judge Bowen to have her 
committed to the Lake Crossing Mental 
Institution. I called her husband, and then 
she didn’t behave in the hospital, either. She 
was isolated, and they sedated her. I think she 
was in there for about ten days, before they 
released her. 

Finally, I got her calmed down and 
explained the situation to her. She told me 
the reason that she went after the kids was 
because they threw stones and mud at her 
and taunted her because she was Chinese and 



The Cosmo Club, 1956-1966 


31 


didn’t speak English. These were white kids. 
She said she finally couldn’t stand it, and that’s 
why she ran after the kids with a cleaver. I also 
found out that she was slightly unhappy here 
in Reno, because she was so isolated from her 
friends and family and from other Chinese. 
She was alone in the apartment with nothing 
to do. I understand that she took the cleaver 
and chopped up the kitchen in the apartment. 
After I got her released, I think her husband 
took off for San Francisco. 

Every time there was something wrong 
the police called me. And Judge Craven always 
called me up there. If there was an accident 
case, or a divorce, or an attorney for Chinese 
people, I was called up there to interpret. 

One time a man who worked for me, 
Quong Tong, was diagnosed as having lung 
cancer, and so he agreed to an operation, so I 
was called to check him into Washoe Medical 
Center to have his surgery. He had half of 
his lung removed. He had a family here, a 
wife and three boys and two girls. His wife 
went up to the hospital and demanded that 
her husband, who was in the recovery room, 
go home with her. [laughter] The floor nurse 
called me up, so there I go again. I went up 
to the hospital, and she was raving mad and 
demanding this and that. Of course, the 
hospital staff didn’t know what she was talking 
about, but they knew that she wanted to see 
her husband. I had to calm her down and take 
her home. Her husband was in the recovery 
room, but she wanted to go do something, 
and she wanted him to babysit. 

Another man who worked for me, Dewey, 
had trouble with his family. His wife didn’t 
understand English nor accept the American 
way of life. She had so many demands—this 
and that. She used to bring her children down 
to the club, and I had to stop her from doing 
that. I said, “This is a club, it’s not a playground 
for the children.” 


She said, “Well, I want my husband to 
watch them.” 

I said, “He can’t watch the children here, 
because no children are allowed in the club!” 
So, I had a terrible time with her. She just 
didn’t understand the way of life. I got tired 
trying to explain it to her, trying to get her 
husband to rein in his family. It wasn’t easy. 

Subsequently, Dewey’s wife had some 
swelling in her glands on the neck. I made 
an appointment for her to go see a doctor, 
and she refused to go. Her husband couldn’t 
persuade her to see a doctor, and I couldn’t 
persuade her. She died because of those lumps 
in her neck—cancer of the lymph nodes. It 
might have saved her to go to a doctor, but 
she was very stubborn, and you couldn’t get 
her to do that. 

Another time one of my employees named 
Wong landed in a nursing home, because he 
had diabetes, and it affected his leg. He had a 
sore on his leg that wouldn’t heal. I went up to 
the nursing home to see him. He complained 
that they weren’t feeding him. He said, “I have 
nothing, no breakfast to eat. Dinner time they 
gave me two chicken wings to eat, and that’s 
all. Will you bring me some food?” 

So, I say, “Why?” I went and complained 
to someone—I don’t remember who—and 
they did check up on that nursing home and 
said that they weren’t treating the patients 
well. 

Ah these problems I had! Everybody 
called me to do this and do that. It was not 
exactly an easy time I had at the Cosmo Club. 
There were so many, many problems. My 
goodness! 

One of the colorful characters around town 
was Redfield. I never met him personally, but 
he was pointed out to me. He hung around the 
Nevada Club a lot. One time I saw him going 
into the Nevada Club with a wheelbarrow, and 



32 


Lai King Chew 


I didn’t understand what he was doing there. 
Later on I was told that he was wheeling in 
the silver dollars that he owed in gambling, 
[laughter] He was paying off his debt with a 
wheelbarrow full of silver dollars! 

Another story about Redfield: Safeway 
had an ad for cheese. It was very, very cheap, 
and it was a misprint in the newspaper. But 
Redfield went to the Safeway, and he bought 
up all the cheese. He wouldn’t pay the price 
it was supposed to be—he insisted on the 
misprinted price in the newspaper. What he 
did with the cheese, I don’t know. Nobody 
knows what he did with it. But he was quite a 
colorful character. He wasn’t very big; he was 
sort of a small person. He used to wear jeans 
and a flannel shirt and plaid jacket of some 
kind—blue, red, green. I’ve never seen him 
dressed up. 

Another character was Mr. Gee. Mr. Gee 
was a graduate of University of California, 
Berkeley in the 1930s. He had a good 
command of English. He went into the 
restaurant business and made a lot of friends. 
A lot of people knew him. He was a favorite 
of Pappy Smith. Mr. Gee liked to play twenty- 
one at Harolds Club, and Pappy Smith would 
come around and double or triple his bet. He 
lost so much money one day, he got mad, so 
he went and bought a ten dollar ticket in keno. 
He won $25,000! [laughter] But it didn’t make 
any difference—he lost it all back to them, 
anyway. Mr. Gee never married. He passed 
away in his late eighties four or five years ago. 
He knew a lot of people in Reno. He knew 
Lincoln Fitzgerald well. Rollan Melton and 
Ty Cobb wrote articles about him. 

When the Civil Rights Act of 1964 
passed, it allowed no discrimination in 
restaurants or in any public places. When 
that law passed, little by little the blacks and 
the Indians started to drift uptown, which 


meant a dwindling number of customers at 
the Cosmo Club. 

In 1966 our lease was up at the Cosmo 
Club. To tell the truth, I was very tired. 
Getting up at four o’clock in the morning 
and running the Cosmo Club was very 
demanding. The Cosmo Club was small, 
so I was the bookkeeper, payroll clerk, and 
everything. I did all the book work with 
the help of Bill Geyer, our CPA. I had been 
running the club since the passing of my 
husband in 1961. Besides our lease being up, 
there were other reasons why I closed: with 
the blacks moving slowly up to the bigger 
clubs, the operation ceased. I was getting very 
tired, and that affected my health, too. So I 
paid all the bills—I didn’t owe anybody—and 
closed up the club. 

When I closed up the Cosmo Club, my 
customers were all very sad and they told me 
they were very sorry. After I left the Cosmo 
Club, the property stayed vacant. Thereafter 
most of my customers went over to the New 
China or uptown. It wasn’t too much later 
when Harrah’s Club bought out the whole 
block from Center Street down to Lake 
Street, so that meant all the bars were gone. 
Harrah’s Club also wanted to buy the Santa 
Fe Hotel, but the Santa Fe Hotel held out; I 
guess they wanted too much, [laughter] So 
they built around it. The Greyhound depot 
moved over to Stevenson Street, so Harrah’s 
got that property. By buying up all that 
property, Harrah’s in effect cleaned up that 
whole street because all the derelicts were 
gone; all the winos were gone; all the drunks 
were gone, because there weren’t any more 
bars, [laughter] 

So the Golden Club was no more; it 
was absorbed by Harrah’s Club on Center 
Street. The Colony Club was no more; it 
was absorbed by Harolds Club and Douglas 
Alley. There had been some drugstores and a 



The Cosmo Club, 1956-1966 


33 


buffet that was owned by a Chinese man, Tom 
Wong, and they were no more, either. Bill 
Fong’s China Club even closed and moved 
to the El Cortez Hotel on Arlington Avenue 
and Second Street. Then that was gone, and 
the Harlem Club behind it in the alley is also 
gone. 

I had no regrets about leaving the Cosmo 
Club. I was pretty tired—it was very hard 
work. You had to appease the public, and 
it was more work than I realized. I learned 
a great deal from the experience: I learned 
humility and I learned about people and their 
circumstances. I learned the way different 
people think, too—like the winos and how 
they think, the black people, the Indians. I 
learned from each of them; they taught me a 
great deal. There were a couple of winos that 
I tried to straighten out and send home, but 
I don’t think I was able to do that. I listened 
to their stories, and I wondered how they 
became winos. One thing I learned from the 
black people is how hard they’re fighting for a 
place in society. Most of them were very nice, 
though there were a few that were not. 

Occasionally, when I am downtown I run 
into a few of them, those people from the 
old days. One, Eddie, used to chauffeur for 
Bill Harrah, and is retired. Then there was a 
bartender of mine who worked as an elevator 
operator out in the Nevada Hospital. Some of 
the others I met have since retired or passed 
away. But one old man is still around: that’s 
King George, and he is 103 or something like 
that now. Old Smitty, my “bodyguard,” died 
almost forty years ago. Then, of course, all 
the other casino owners have passed away, 
too, like Pappy Smith, Howard Farris, and 
Charlie Cowan. Len Harris, who was mayor, 
passed away; the police chief, Briscoe, died; 
Ted Berrum passed away. Anyway, I knew a 
lot of them. 


With that generation of club owners gone, 
there are a lot of differences. I don’t know 
this new generation—they’re all corporations 
where, before, we were just a very friendly 
people. We’d meet and have lunch and talk 
about the casinos, the games, and what we 
could do to improve it. At the time, it was very 
friendly. I don’t know how they operate now. 
I think it’s all corporations, and they operate 
differently. We used to see Bill Harrah running 
through the clubs to look at his operations and 
see how they were doing. Of course, Pappy 
Smith was always there running around, 
too. But today I don’t think you know who 
owns what. That’s the difference. There are 
differences in the way the present club owners 
treat their customers. I think what they lack 
now is the relationship they once had with 
the customers, with the public. They’re not 
as friendly as the old clubs were. Pappy Smith 
used to greet the people—they were all there 
in the pit, greeting customers, and that made 
a lot of difference. Now you don’t even know 
who owns what. Pappy Smith always used 
to say, “You have to send out winners to get 
players,” and he is right. You have to send out 
winners. It’s the volume that counts. Also, 
they no longer have the amenities they used 
to give the public here. The old owners used 
to comp their big players a great deal, and 
now they don’t seem to be doing that. They’d 
comp them with drinks or dinner or lunch or 
some show or something. After their players 
dropped a couple of thousand dollars, I think 
they were entitled to it. [laughter] Then you 
have to know your players, too. They did know 
their players where they don’t seem to now. 




3 


After the Cosmo Club 


Tom Wong was the proprietor of the 
Bankers Cafe, right across from Harolds Club, 
near the Archway Drug Store. His father had 
a restaurant in Rapid City, South Dakota, and 
then they came out to California, where he 
had a restaurant in Dixon through the war 
years. During the war Tom said his father 
had a lot of government contracts to provide 
food, so, evidently, he did very well. Then a 
highway or freeway went through and took 
his restaurant away, so he came to Reno and 
bought the Bankers Cafe. The Bankers Cafe 
was a restaurant and also had two twenty- 
one tables. Tom Wong operated the club 
from about 1964 to 1967, when he sold it to 
Harolds Club. 

Tom walked into my office one day and 
told me he had a lot of problems: he said he 
was being sued here and there for unpaid 
bills. He said, “They are paid!” I asked him 
how, and he told me he didn’t take care of 
it; his wife and daughter did by paying cash 
for the bills. I asked him if he had receipts 
and he said, “After we pay them, we just 
throw away all the receipts. We don’t owe 


anybody!” So they had no proof that the bills 
had been paid. He said, “Will you at least help 
me see an attorney?” Tom’s English was not 
fluent at all, and he needed me to interpret. I 
think his attorney at that time was Les Gray. 
Subsequently Tom had all these little lawsuits 
here and there to settle his debts. He owed 
Rauhut’s Bakery on Commercial Row; he 
owed Model Dairy; he owed a meat company; 
and he owed ever so many merchants. 
Evidently, his wife and daughter weren’t very 
good bookkeepers: they paid bills when they 
were asked, and when they were not asked, 
they did not pay bills, [laughter] But we 
settled all of it. 

Then Tom went to Fallon and bought into 
a business, the Palace Club, where he took 
over the keno. Tom’s investment in the Palace 
was $60,000, and a man named Lockridge 
owned the other 50 percent interest. Tom told 
me something was wrong, because Lockridge 
would make up the bills and count all the 
money. In other words, Tom had no idea of 
how much money was being brought in; he 
had no control. The strange thing was ... I 



36 


Lai King Chew 


asked, “You bought into the Palace Club. Are 
you licensed?” 

He said, “I just took over the keno.” 

I said, “You can’t engage in gaming in this 
state without being licensed.” 

He said, “Well, I am licensed.” 

I said, “He’s licensed, but you’re not!” 
He thought that as long as the owner was 
licensed, that would suffice—but it didn’t. So 
there was another lawsuit. 

He said, “I want to get out of there; I want 
him to give me back my money.” 

Well, the money was already spent, so 
he couldn’t get his money back, but he sued 
Lockridge. It was a long court case, [laughter] 
The judge presiding was Frank Gregory, and 
I have never seen a court case conducted the 
way it was: it looked to me like the judge was 
half asleep or drunk, and Tom Wong’s side 
was never presented! The judge ruled in favor 
of Lockridge, and I couldn’t understand why. 
I said, “Something is awfully wrong here. 
They were prejudiced and biased. How could 
Frank Gregory judge a case when the other 
side hadn’t even had a chance to present their 
case?” So I came back to Reno and I ran into 
Eddie Scott, who was with the NAACP. I told 
him about the case. I said, “I’ve never seen a 
case more biased and discriminating than the 
one in Fallon.” 

He said, “It sure is. Let me talk to the Civil 
Liberties lawyer.” We wanted to appeal the 
case, but meanwhile, Les Gray told us that 
he wouldn’t be able to handle Tom’s case, 
because he was running for the state senate 
and was too busy. So we went to Charlie 
Springer. (Charlie Springer at one time ran for 
governor, and my son and his friend, Kelsey 
Harder, painted Charlie’s campaign wagon. 
They also knew Springer’s wife, Joan, from 
the university; she was attending classes up 
there.) We explained the case to Charlie, and 
he agreed that it didn’t seem right. We got a 


court order to seal off the cash flow of the 
Palace Club. The sheriff of Churchill County 
accompanied us. We sealed the money, and 
we also emptied the slot machines and sealed 
them off. Lockridge couldn’t use anything, 
so he declared bankruptcy. Of course, Tom 
Wong filed his claim there. Subsequently, the 
Palace Club went on the auction block and 
was bought by the Nugget in Lallon for, I’ve 
forgotten, how much money. So in the end, 
Tom Wong got his money back. 

After that I said, “OK, now you are 
finished with your lawsuit and everything. 
You got your money back, so keep it and 
enjoy it!” But before I knew it, in 1967 he 
bought the Sagebrush Club in Lallon. The 
Sagebrush Club was owned by John Ligone. It 
had a bar, restaurant, crap table, keno and two 
twenty-one tables, along with slot machines; 
it was a nice little compact club. The club 
was held in escrow while Tom applied for a 
gaming license. Tom asked for my and Charlie 
Springer’s help. We went down with him to 
Carson City to sit in on his hearing. Of course, 
some of the board members already knew me, 
so Tom got his license, with the provision that 
I would help him and that his records and 
everything else would be in English and not 
in Chinese, [laughter] I was licensed as one 
of his key employees, so he got his license. 

I wasn’t actively engaged in the club’s 
operations, because I was in Reno and Tom 
was in Lallon, but I got him an accountant, 
Bill Geyer. After the club was open about a 
month, Tom called me up and said, “I’m in 
trouble again.” 

I said, “What?” He told me he didn’t know 
what his employees were doing. They’d count 
the money but he didn’t know whether the 
count was right or not. I said, “What in the 
world? You own the place; you are supposed to 
be there to count the money!” [laughter] His 
employees were stealing from him! (I won’t 



After the Cosmo Club 


37 


mention their names.) I said, “Where in the 
world did you get this crew?” 

He said, “I don’t know—somebody 
recommended them.” 

I said, “Where are your fill slips and your 
take slips?” 

He said, “What are those?” So I got him 
to fire the crew. (He had a pit boss who was 
later blackballed by the state for cheating at 
other clubs, too.) So Tom got another crew, 
and I got some new tickets for him for the 
club. I also got him a machine where there 
would be duplicates made and so forth. I said, 
“Now do it right!” 

Then, again he called me up, needing my 
help: he didn’t know how to do the payroll. 
He said, “You’ve got to come back and do 
the payroll for me and do the office work. I 
don’t know what’s going on.” So I ended up 
spending eleven years up there doing his 
payroll, the office work, paying his bills, and 
everything else. 

I would go to Fallon about every other 
week and spend a few days doing the payroll 
and the book work and everything with 
the accountant: we’d get the taxes out, the 
employment security, everything. 

The day manager there was a chap named 
Chuck Oeding. He helped Tom Wong with 
hiring and firing and interviewing. Bob and 
Ethel Caudle also worked at the Sagebrush. 
They had twin daughters, Sheila and Sharon, 
two sons, Bill and George. One of the sons 
died. I don’t remember which one. And Ethel 
Caudle died afterwards. 

So everything went along very well, 
but I was tired of traveling; I wanted to 
quit many times. I said, “I’m going to quit! 
You get somebody else to do it for you. Get 
your daughter to do it.” But she couldn’t 
handle it, because somehow his wife and 
his daughter, coming from China, had a 
different conception of running a business. 


They figured it was their business and they 
could do as they wanted. I tried to explain 
to them this was a gaming business and it 
was a privilege to do business—you have a 
privileged license and you do it according to 
rules and regulations of the gaming board, but 
it was too difficult to make them understand. 
We were just like oil and water, [laughter] 
I tried to impress on them how the money 
should be counted and the whole procedure 
of gaming. 

The gaming board had a lot of faith in my 
integrity, I guess. And so did the liquor sellers: 
I managed to get Tom an open account with 
all the liquor companies based on my past 
experience with them. Of course, Tom had a 
very bad credit rating from before. But I gave 
my guarantee that I would be paying the bills, 
so we didn’t have any trouble, [laughter] 

Doing business in Fallon was entirely 
different from the Cosmo Club; the clientele 
was entirely different. In the neighborhood 
there was a jeweler, Dana Coffee, and 
then a dentist, Dr. McCuskey. There were 
attorneys—one was Mario Recanzone. He’s a 
judge now. Fallon was a little town that had 
little restaurants here and markets there. They 
had the Kent Market. They had a stationery 
store. The clientele in Fallon was mostly 
cowboys and local people, business people, 
ranchers and farmers, and also young men 
from the Fallon Naval Air Station. The men 
were from different aircraft carriers, the 
Enterprise and the Hornet. The young, young 
airmen get there training there. A lot of them 
were around the age of nineteen or twenty, 
so every time they came in we had to check 
their I.D.’s. [laughter] They could eat at the 
restaurant, but to gamble, we had to check 
their I.D.’s. Sometimes they would miss their 
bus to go back to the base, so I would get in 
my car and give them a ride up to the base. 



38 


Lai King Chew 


[laughter] Nice bunch of kids, though, not 
troublesome or anything. Very nice bunch. 
We also had the Marines, since they were 
doing their survival training in the area. Then 
every July there was a big Indian rodeo and 
pow-wow in Fallon. It was very interesting, 
because Indians came from all over the state, 
and the restaurant did a very good business. 
We always made sure to have a large pot of 
chili, because they loved chili. 

So, the Sagebrush clientele was very 
different from the clientele of the Cosmo 
Club. The Cosmo Club was not easy to 
run. It was very stressful; there were a lot of 
problems. I had to deal with so many difficult 
situations there. 

The Sagebrush was a nice little club with 
many reputable—and disreputable—patrons, 
[laughter] We were visited by Governor 
O’Callaghan and various state senators. Oscar 
Bonavena used to come to the bar. He was 
the boxer who was murdered outside the 
Mustang Ranch. (In 1976 Oscar Bonavena 
was reportedly having an affair with Joe 
Conforte’s wife, Jesse Sally Burgess. Convicted 
in the murder was Conforte’s bodyguard, Ross 
Brymer.) 

The restaurant did very well. We had 
an interesting Chinese cook by the name of 
Moon. Moon was in the war, and they say he 
was shell-shocked; you couldn’t have a straight 
conversation with him, because he would go 
off on a tangent. But he was a good cook, and 
you could place a dozen orders on him, and he 
would get every one right; he had an uncanny 
memory for remembering orders. The food 
was mostly American, although, occasionally, 
they served some Chinese dinners. We had 
another Chinese cook from Los Angeles. He 
was there for less than six months when he 
got a phone call and said he had to leave to 
go back to L.A. because his fifteen-year-old 
daughter had been raped. So he went back 


to L.A., and a few weeks later he called and 
said, “I won’t be able to come back to work. 
I am serving a prison term of two years for 
manslaughter. In the courtroom, I killed the 
one that raped my daughter.” 

I more or less ran the Sagebrush Club, 
even though I only intended to stay a little 
while to help Tom organize it. I never could 
leave, though, because the next thing I knew, 
Tom would be begging me to come back and 
help him out. He’d say, “I can’t do it; I’ll have 
to sell the place if you don’t come back and 
help me!” 

The Sagebrush Club had all the games: 
slots, keno, twenty-one, craps, and poker. 
Tom Wong ran the poker game—he loved to 
play poker. They had a good poker game with 
all the older people in Fallon. Even Harold 
Smith Sr. would drive to Fallon to play poker. 
When he played, it was all night, [laughter] 
Sometimes he would play poker for twenty- 
four hours, thirty-six hours, day and night. 
Then he would take a nap and come back and 
play again. He might play for a whole week 
like that. That was Harold Smith Sr. Tom 
Wong would run the table until he got tired. 
Then he would have somebody else run the 
table. Harold Smith Sr.’s favorite drink was 
Courvoisier. He drank up all the Courvoisier 
we had in the club, so the boss told me to go 
out to the liquor store and buy a bottle of 
Courvoisier to use until the liquor salesman 
came by. Smith had a bodyguard that drove 
him up in his Cadillac. If he ran out of money, 
why, he would send his bodyguard back to 
Harolds Club to get some more money. I think 
he lost quite a bit. He was too drunk to know 
what he was doing, anyway. 

Finally, one night in 1978, we had a 
robbery at the Sagebrush Club. I was doing 
some work about three or four o’clock in 
the morning, when we were robbed by an 



After the Cosmo Club 


39 


ex-employee. I was hurt very badly in the 
robbery The man tried to kill me, because I 
recognized him. I landed in the hospital for a 
couple of weeks. First, I was in the Churchill 
County Hospital, but I was transferred to 
Washoe Medical, because they couldn’t 
handle my injuries. Subsequently, the robber 
was arrested trying to flee with some of the 
Sagebrush money. He had over $10,000 in 
a paper bag and he was trying to take the 
morning bus and leave for Reno, I guess, 
or parts unknown, but he was caught and 
arrested by the Fallon police. When his case 
came up, I had to go to court and identify 
him, and he was sent to prison in Carson City. 

I stayed at the Sagebrush Club until 
shortly after I was injured in the robbery. I 
thought I would take the opportunity to leave 
the place, but Tom Wong fell ill, so I went back 
to help him out, and then he died. I had been 
injured in April of 1978, and he died in July 
of a pulmonary embolism; he was sixty-nine. 

Tom Wong was very well liked in the 
community; he fit in very well. He had a great 
rapport with the citizens of Fallon, and they 
all respected him; he was a very generous 
man. Every Christmas and Thanksgiving he 
would open his restaurant to free dinners for 
the senior citizens. He also gave free dinners 
for his employees and their families. Upon his 
death, they had a very nice memorial service 
for him, and he was subsequently buried in 
San Francisco. Tom Wong was a member of 
the Gung Tong in San Francisco. 

After Tom died I went to Fallon, and I 
tried to straighten everything out. I could 
have gone to the gaming board and asked for 
time until we could license somebody else, 
but I couldn’t make his daughter and wife 
understand. So to save myself the headaches, 
I said, “Well, I’m going to wind up everything, 
and I’m going to leave the place.” I wasn’t 
going to work there under any circumstance, 


because I was still suffering from some of the 
injuries I sustained. 

When Chuck Oeding, the day manager, 
found out I was leaving, he said, “If you are 
leaving, I’m leaving, too.” So two of the club’s 
key employees were leaving; the owner was 
dead, and the daughter, who was not capable 
of doing anything, was the only key employee 
remaining. So to absolve myself of any 
responsibility, I wrote to the gaming board 
and told them that because of the death of 
the owner, I was relinquishing my position 
as the chief operator. I understand that the 
daughter continued to run the place. Once 
again, everything they bought there was by 
cash because I had told all the vendors that 
I was leaving. Soon the gaming board closed 
the gaming operation. They left the bar and 
the restaurant open, but they closed all the 
gaming and the slots because there was no 
licensee. Later on, the family sold the club to 
Dr. McCuskey, a dentist in Fallon. I haven’t 
been back since, so I don’t know what has 
happened. I spent eleven years in Fallon and 
six years in Reno. I think eighteen years or so 
in the gaming is enough. I’m tired! [laughter] 

After my injury, I moved back into Reno 
from Sparks, where I was living alone in a 
three-bedroom house. The children decided 
they didn’t want me to live alone, so I moved 
to Reno into one of the houses my son owned; 
it was near the southwest area on Wright 
Street. Then I was closer to my son, Cherky, 
and my daughter, Hwa-di. 



40 


Lai King Chew 



4 

The Chinese in Reno 


There weren’t many Chinese families in 
Reno when we moved here, only a couple 
hundred Chinese here, single men, mostly 
working in the clubs. There were a couple of 
laundries and a couple of Chinese restaurants: 
Mr. Gee’s Pagoda in Sparks and the Soy 
Sound. The Choy family had the Mandarin. 
The Sun Cafe was opened in the later 1950s, 
and they sold mostly American food, so it was 
not considered Chinese food. 

Most of the Chinese lived in what they 
called Chinatown along Lake Street and 
East Sixth Street in homes that had been 
converted into rooming houses. A lot of the 
Chinese workers lived there. They lived in 
small apartments or shared a room together 
and cooked in a common kitchen. A lot of 
them would eat at the Mandarin Cafe, because 
they could get Chinese home cooking. The 
Mandarin Cafe was located on Lake Street 
where the Oxford Motel is today. Mrs. Choy 
did the cooking. The Choys had a lot of 
children, two boys and four or five girls, and 
the girls waited on tables. It was a family affair, 
family project. 


Eugene Choy became a dentist. Melvin 
Choy is still here in Reno somewhere. All 
the daughters have married and are scattered 
here, there, and all over in California. But the 
Choy family are old-timers here. They were 
here in the 1930s. They came shortly after 
Mr. Gee. Gradually, Mr. Choy opened other 
businesses in Reno. He had another place 
down on South Virginia Street; then he moved 
out to East Fourth Street before he retired. 

There was a Dr. Wong, an herbalist, who 
bought his own house on Sixth Street between 
Lake Street and Valley Road; he also practiced 
there. He didn’t have a family, just a wife here. 
He also moved back to California. 

Henry Yup is one who has been here a 
long time. He is from Lovelock and had a little 
coffee shop there. Then he bought a house and 
lived somewhere in Reno. I guess, unless you 
bought your own house, you couldn’t rent 
a decent apartment because of how people 
discriminated. Henry Yup had what they 
called a malt shop at first. Later on, he had 
the Sun Cafe on Virginia Street in which he 
catered both Chinese and American food. 



42 


Lai King Chew 


He and his wife retired from the restaurant 
business, and he and his family still live in 
Reno. 

Once a month the Chinese workers would 
go back to San Francisco or Oakland to pick 
up groceries or supplies. We usually put in 
an order with them, and they would shop 
for us, too. Since Reno didn’t have a Chinese 
grocery store back then, most of the Chinese 
went to California or sent their shopping list 
for staples with somebody else. 

There were several Chinese pioneer 
families in Reno: Mr. Gee, who had a 
restaurant in Sparks on B Street. Mr. Gee 
passed away about three years ago, I think. 
He knew many people in Reno; he had been 
here since the early 1930s. Later on Mr. Gee 
moved his restaurant from Sparks to South 
Virginia with a Caucasian partner. I think his 
name is Conklin. They didn’t get along. They 
had different ideas of running a business. 
So then he moved out to Fourth Street and 
Stoker where Mi Casa Too is now. He had the 
Pagoda there until he retired. He sold pretty 
good Chinese food, considering the material 
he had to work with, and he built up quite a 
clientele with the older people here. It was 
mostly Cantonese food. He had trouble with 
his cook, too. He had a very good cook named 
Harry. Harry loved to gamble—blackjack and 
craps. When he lost money, he didn’t want to 
work. When he won money, he didn’t want to 
work. He always got advances from Mr. Gee 
and he owed so much money, Mr. Gee said, 
“You’d better come to work and work off some 
of what you owe me.” So he would go to work. 
Mr. Gee had a lot of old timers working for 
him. They were more reliable than the young 
ones, except for Harry. He was old, but he was 
unreliable because of his gambling. 

The Tim Ko family ran the Dollar Store 
where Parker’s is now. They were very nice. 
Tim Ko had a Caucasian wife, Alice, and he 


was a member of the Reno Rotary Club. They 
were here long before we were. They lived at 
Keystone and Jones Street. The house is still 
there. Then the Dollar Store closed down. 
National Dollar Store is a chain of stores 
owned by Chinese and headquartered in San 
Francisco. Tim moved back to California. He 
was originally from Lodi, California. Later 
on, we heard that he passed away, but I don’t 
know what happened to his wife. 

Bill Fong and Wally Tun and my husband 
were a later generation that belonged to the 
Joss House Society. Bill Fong had the New 
China Club and Wally’s family had motels and 
property they managed in town, but they had 
come later. Afterwards, the Chinese more or 
less disbanded. Since then the Choy parents 
have passed away, along with Mr. Gee, and 
Bill Fong, and my husband. 

I don’t know whether there were any 
particular places that the older Chinese of this 
area were buried. Most of the older Chinese 
were buried for a while, and then their 
remains were shipped back to China. That was 
the custom in the late 1800s and early 1900s. 

A little about Henry Woo: Henry was born 
in China in 1860 and came to the United States 
when he was seventeen or eighteen. He never 
went back to China, and he was 105 years old 
when he died in Reno. Henry had retired from 
working on the railroad (where he knew my 
father), and then did some menial work at the 
clubs before dealing faro at the Bank Club. 
When he was ninety-eight years old, he was 
dealing faro. Then he retired. He always hung 
around the Cosmo Club. He liked to visit and 
read the Chinese newspapers, which were 
mostly published in San Francisco, and talk 
with the Chinese people. From him I learned 
a lot of background about the Chinese people 
in Nevada. Each morning he’d leave his little 
room on Nevada Street a little after seven 



The Chinese in Reno 


43 


o’clock and come down to our club. From 
Nevada Street to the Cosmo Club was quite 
a walk, maybe ten blocks. He became quite a 
fixture in crossing Fourth Street, which had 
a great deal of traffic. The light would change 
many times before he would get across the 
street, because he walked very slowly with 
a cane. Henry became quite a well-known 
figure, and all the drivers would recognize 
him crossing the street. Sometimes we would 
drive him back home, and he would tell us a 
great deal about his life in Nevada. He worked 
on the railroad in Carlin and in Sparks; he also 
worked in the mines. He worked in some bars, 
cleaning up the sawdust floors. He said that 
was the best job because he would retrieve 
a great deal of money—the gold coins that 
the cowboys had dropped in their drunken 
sprees, [laughter] 

Henry said there used to be a larger 
Chinese community here in Reno. He used to 
tell us that in May of each year, the Chinese 
would hitch up some wagons and head to 
Sacramento for supplies, such as Chinese 
foodstuffs. On these trips he would “ride 
shotgun.” I said, “Shotgun?” 

He said, “Yes, wed been robbed by bandits 
and Indians.” So he would ride shotgun! The 
wagon train would leave in May, and they 
arrived in Sacramento in August. After a week 
or two getting supplies in Sacramento, they 
would leave in August and arrive back in Reno 
in November, [laughter] 

Henry had many, many tales to tell; he 
was very interesting. He told us a lot about 
different pioneers in this area. He knew 
George Wingfield Sr., whom a lot of Chinese 
knew at that time, because quite a few of 
them worked on his ranch. And Henry 
told us that the Chinese colony had cribs 
along the Truckee River, near the Bundox. 
The Joss House was also along the Truckee 
River for a long time, and Henry became the 


caretaker for a while. One time the Truckee 
River crested and Henry had to climb up on 
the table until the Fire Department rescued 
him. [laughter] Anyway, later on, the Chinese 
people more or less disbanded, and they were 
scattered—some went back to China, and 
some went out to California. 

One day in 1965, Henry Woo failed 
to show up at the club. On the second day 
when he didn’t show up, I said, “Something 
is wrong.” So one of the dealers at the club, 
Harry Tong, contacted one of the policemen 
in the neighborhood. They went up to his 
apartment and had the landlord open the 
door. They found that Henry had passed away 
in his sleep; he was 105 years old. I think he 
had been getting some welfare, so I called up 
the public administrator and told him the 
circumstances of Henry’s death and asked 
for permission for the Joss House Society to 
bury him and notify his kinfolk in China. I 
said, “He doesn’t have anything. We’ll clean 
up his apartment and take care of his burial.” 
The public administrator said that that was all 
right. That relieved the state of having to take 
care of it. So the Joss House Society bought 
his plot, bought his casket, and buried him. 
Then the Chinese secretary of the Joss House 
Society wrote a letter back to his relatives 
in China and notified them of his death at 
age 105. He had left a wife back in China, 
who had adopted a son. She raised him and 
from him had a grandson. We notified the 
grandson of Henry’s death and sent Henry’s 
belongings back to China. He didn’t have very 
much. Henry never had very much money, 
but he used to send a few dollars back to the 
grandson—maybe fifty dollars once a year. 
And that is our Henry. 

The Joss House Society was formed here 
by a group of men around 1870. It was a 
temple, a place for Buddhist worship. They 



44 


Lai King Chew 


put together an altar. People would come and 
say their prayers, worship their ancestors, 
and burn incense. The upkeep was all by 
donations. They had a little booklet where 
they recorded all the donations. The Joss 
House Society also settled disputes among the 
members. To avoid going to American courts, 
they usually settled disputes by arbitration 
among themselves. 

There’s quite a history to the Joss House 
Society. We learned a great deal about it from 
Mr. Gee and Mr. Choy, because they were here 
the longest. Of course, Henry Woo told us a lot 
about the Joss House. They were all members. 
Mr. Choy at one time was very active in the 
Joss House Society, because he was near town. 
In the 1800s the Joss House Society was given 
a piece of land near the Truckee River by Dr. 
Manning and Dr. Haskell, where they built a 
little brick building and an altar. They called it 
the Joss House. The Joss House had members 
from Reno, Fallon, Carlin, and Elko—from all 
over northern Nevada. There they had their 
meetings and their Buddhist worship. Henry 
Woo was the caretaker of the Joss House 
there until it got flooded. The foundation was 
weakened, and it was condemned by the city. 
When we arrived here in the mid 1950s Mr. 
Choy said, “Can you do something about that 
Joss House we have?” 

My husband said, “Well, Bill Fong’s been 
here longer. Why didn’t you all get together?” 

Mr. Choy said, “We couldn’t get him to do 
anything, because every time he wants to do 
anything, it costs money.” 

So, my husband looked into it. Charlie 
found that it was condemned and needed to 
be torn down. Meanwhile, Charlie was elected 
president of the Joss House Society, and Bill 
Fong was vice president. Then there was a 
treasurer, a Chinese secretary, and an English 
secretary. They couldn’t find anybody to be 
the English secretary, so finally they elected 


me. I was the first woman to hold any post in 
the Joss House Society. 

And Bill Fong said, “Yes, I found somebody 
to tear it down for so many hundreds of 
dollars.” 

And Charlie said, “I found somebody 
that would tear it down for nothing. All they 
want for a price is the bricks.” It was an old 
brick building. So, that’s what they did. It was 
torn down. 

Then the Bundox was built, and it took 
the Joss House’s right of way. The only access 
to the property before it was condemned had 
been through the property of the Bundox. 
Charlie had a survey done on the property 
and found that the Bundox had built over the 
property line a couple of feet, but he did not 
go to court or file a lawsuit. They decided to 
sell the property to Bud Loomis [E. Frandsen 
Loomis], owner of the Bundox. Charlie asked 
$25,000 for the piece of property, and they 
were negotiating, but Bud Loomis had to 
go out of town. He said he would proceed 
with the negotiation when he came back, 
but he died very suddenly, so the Joss House 
property was left in limbo. 

Later, after my husband died, Bill Fong 
negotiated to sell the Joss House property for 
$15,000 to the Bundox people. That money 
was put into the bank with the intention of 
finding another piece of property, but as the 
years went by we never did find another piece 
of property. Property was too expensive, and 
not only that, people started to lose interest 
in the Joss House Society. It was another 
generation of Chinese—waiters, students. 
The younger ones had no interest in the Joss 
House or such worship. Their parents were 
putting them through school, so they had no 
need of help. The last time funds were used 
from the Joss House Society was when Henry 
Woo died. The whole burial and everything 
cost about $1,500. 



The Chinese in Reno 


45 


Well, Bill Fong became president and 
Quong Tong became vice president. Wally 
Tun became treasurer, and I was English 
secretary Henry Yup, Mr. Gee, and Mr. Choy 
were trustees. Then all the officers died but 
me. I was the only one left, except for the 
trustees. 

Meanwhile, we had put some of the fund 
into CDs, had it roll over, and after twenty 
years that $15,000 grew to about $35,000. 
So then, we had a meeting—Mr. Gee, Henry 
Yup, Mr. Choy, and I. “What are we going to 
do with this money?” 

So we called some of the Chinese for 
a meeting. Bill Fong’s widow, Ann, turned 
over the records that he had been in charge 
of, including the bank book. It was a very 
interesting meeting because we had some 
young Chinese people attend: waiters, 
students, people who didn’t know of the 
Joss House Society and its money. But when 
we told them about the money, they were 
very interested, naturally. We had a terrible 
argument. Some said, “Well, why don’t we 
split the money among ourselves?” 

I said, “No.” 

They said, “Well, why don’t we divide it 
up? 

Some said, “I can use the money; I can 
go to school.” But we decided that that was 
no solution. You couldn’t help one, because 
you’d have to help all of them. So that was 
no solution. We had a very unhappy time for 
quite a few months, [laughter] Then there were 
those who didn’t agree with us; they hired an 
attorney to get control of the money. But there 
was no way we could turn the money over to 
these strangers. Cliff Young was our attorney 
and helped with these lawsuits. (Cliff knew 
about the Joss House Society many, many 
years before, during the 1950s. He attended 
some meetings with us when we were trying 
to settle the riverside property before it was 


sold.) When these people threatened to go 
to court to have it settled, Cliff Young wrote 
and said, “All right, if you want to sue us, we 
will go to court and we will be ready. But the 
court costs will be shared by you.” 

Primarily, their idea was to buy another 
Joss House near downtown. And I said, “We 
haven’t got enough money to buy any property. 
If we put $35,000 as a down payment, who’s 
going to carry the mortgage? And who’s going 
to pay for the utility, and the telephone, and 
the upkeep of the place?” I said, “Where is the 
money coming from?” So I vetoed that idea. 
“The older Chinese that were interested in 
the Joss House have all passed away, and this 
younger generation is not interested in the 
Joss House.” So after that they sort of decided 
against it. We didn’t hear from them again so 
we figured the case was closed. 

I said, “Let’s build some kind of memorial.” 

“What do you suggest?” 

Well, there were a lot of suggestions: 
maybe dedicate a room in a hospital and 
call it the Joss House room, or establish a 
scholarship from it. 

“No.” 

In the end we decided that we would 
establish some sort of a memorial for the 
Chinese. We got hold of Gene Sullivan of the 
Washoe County Parks Department. He was 
a friend of Henry Yup’s, and they had both 
come from Lovelock, as had Cliff Young. At 
that time the Rancho San Rafael Park was just 
beginning to take shape. Henry said, “Well, 
we could build a pavilion there and have it 
memorialized.” So we went out there and 
looked around at Rancho San Rafael Park 
and agreed that we could have a pavilion 
and a plaque in memory of the Chinese. We 
understood from Gene Sullivan that the Parks 
Department would maintain it. So we turned 
the money over to the Parks Board and they 
built the pavilion which now stands in San 



46 


Lai King Chew 


Rafael Park. It’s called the Joss House Society 
Pavilion. (It’s also known as the Pagoda.) Then 
we closed the account at the bank and all of 
us signed it: Wally, Henry, Mr. Gee and I. We 
were the only ones left from the inception of 
the money. 

They had an opening ceremony when 
the pavilion was completed in May of 1984 
or 1985. We had a dedication out there and 
it was very nice, though windy and a little 
cold, [laughter] Mayor Sferrazza spoke. We 
had also invited Governor Bryan, but he 
sent a representative, because he couldn’t 
come. Charlie Mapes and Clark Guild and 
some of the older people that knew about the 
Joss House Society also attended. There is a 
barbecue pit at the pavilion for whoever wants 
to use it. (I understand from Gene Sullivan 
that it has been used quite a bit.) There is 
a small fee for use of the barbecue pit, but 
Chinese people have a waiver and don’t have 
to pay the fee. I have used it a couple of times 
for children’s barbecues. 

Aside from the Joss House Society, there 
was another Chinese organization in Reno 
called the Six Company; there wasn’t too 
much difference between the two. Both were 
for charity. Members of six families formed 
the Six Company: the Wongs, Kwans, Chins 
and Woos, and two other families whose 
names I can’t remember. The Six Company 
was also formed for charity, to help each other 
and to help the Chinese community. The only 
difference was, the Joss House was a place of 
Buddhist worship. They had their own form 
of worship. A lot of the old Chinese adhered 
to the Buddhist religion, whereas the Chinese 
nowadays do not. Most of them are Christians 
or nothing at all. [laughter] The membership 
of the local Six Company Organization and 
the Joss House Society was pretty much the 
same people. Joss House and Six Company 


mixed. They used to have meetings together 
and discuss various things, like if some family 
needed help or was having a problem with 
another Chinese family or whatever. 

There were also fraternal organizations 
like the tong societies. There were members of 
different tongs in Las Vegas and they claimed 
that as their territory. For instance, there’s the 
Hop Sing Tong in Las Vegas. In Reno, the 
workers of the New China Club and our club 
were members of another tong. 

The Joss House Society’s building was 
occupied by the Hop Sing Tong, but they let 
us use it. It’s all demolished now. I know that 
it had a little kitchen and sometimes some of 
the various employees who were members of 
the Hop Sing Tong cooked their meals there. 
But all that area is gone now; it’s all cleaned 
up and it’s perfectly safe to go down there, 
[laughter] At one time it wasn’t. 

The local Six Company was not part of 
a national organization, although it could 
have been. Most cities that had large Chinese 
colonies, like San Francisco and New York, 
Chicago, and even cities in Canada, had Six 
Company organizations. The organizations 
were a social outlet and provided a way for 
families to settle disputes among one another 
instead of going to American courts. The 
Chinese settle disputes among themselves. 

The tongs have no limit to members. 
Anyone could j oin—that is, if they accept you. 
At one time the tongs were very powerful; 
they used to have tong wars and different 
tongs would kill each other off like the Mafia, 
[laughter] But since then all the belligerent 
members of different tongs have passed 
away and the younger generations are not so 
belligerent; they don’t have fights anymore. 
Mostly the tongs are more like a protective 
organization. If you are a member of a tong 
and there is some dispute like a business 



The Chinese in Reno 


47 


dispute, then the tong would try to arbitrate 
and settle for you. The Hop Sing Tong is 
no longer in existence locally. The older 
generation that were members of the Hop Sing 
Tong have all passed away, and this younger 
generation doesn’t belong to the tong at all. 
All these groups disbanded, all disappeared, 
for the reason that there are no longer older 
Chinese here. Maybe I am the oldest one. 
[laughter] Henry Yup and his family are still 
here, but we’re the only ones left. 

I did some work as an interpreter in court 
actions involving the Chinese in Chinese 
divorce cases, accident cases, and so forth. I 
have a speaking knowledge of the Cantonese 
Third Dialect and the Fourth Dialect, but not 
Mandarin. Most of the Chinese here at that 
time were all southerners, all Cantonese; there 
were very few northerners, Manchurians. 
Most spoke the dialect which is the more rural 
dialect. The Third Dialect, Cantonese, is more 
city dialect, [laughter] My father spoke the 
Fourth Dialect and mother spoke the Third. 
That’s why I learned both. 

When I acted as an interpreter, I didn’t 
receive a fee. I guess they figured I was part 
of the Joss House Society, so I guess they 
expected it. It wasn’t always a pleasant job, 
I’m telling you, because some of the Chinese 
people sometimes misinterpreted things, and 
I could get into a lot of trouble. However, 
I did quite a bit of interpreting for various 
Chinese and their businesses, such as their 
bill payments. I have gotten to know many an 
attorney while interpreting for the Chinese: 
Charles Springer, Les Gray, Cliff Young, Tom 
Craven and Clark Guild. 

I was also occasionally called to accompany 
various Chinese men or women to doctors as 
an interpreter. Many of our employees at the 
club were patients of Dr. Smernoff. He had 
his office up on North Virginia Street and the 


beauty of it was that you didn’t have to make 
an appointment. It was first come, first served 
at Dr. Smernoff’s office, so it was convenient 
for the employees, too. They also went to some 
doctors up on Ryland Street where there was 
a clinic. 

The 1960 Winter Olympics were held at 
Squaw Valley, and I think in December of 
1959 is when all the countries’ participants 
came through Reno. We had a big parade 
down Virginia Street, I remember. They 
wanted local people to participate in the 
parade and represent their different countries, 
[laughter] Well, I marched in the parade 
with my husband and some others. It 
was very colorful because many different 
countries were represented, and they were 
marching through Reno on their way up to 
Squaw Valley, where they were housed. All 
of Virginia Street was closed, and it was very 
festive. They had flags all decorated. There 
must have been a committee to take care 
of all this. But we didn’t go up to see any of 
the games up on the hill, because it was too 
crowded. 




5 

Travels 


In 1914 my mother took us back to 
China, but I can’t remember too much 
because we were so young—just tots. I think 
I was about four or five and my brothers 
were about six and four. I remember being 
ill because the sanitation was not as it is in 
the United States. 

I remember the village of Hoi San was so 
picturesque. There were little lanterns and the 
doors were painted lacquer red and had red 
lanterns during New Year’s. We had a great 
big chandelier in the middle of the living 
room, and we had teak tables and chairs with 
red cushions. The chandelier, as big as it was, 
could be lowered with a red velvet ribbon. Of 
course, all that was gone when we returned in 
1981; everything was gone. 

Later on, after I graduated from high 
school in 1929,1 went back to China. I went 
back intending to go to the university in 
Yancheng, but it didn’t happen, because I was 
ill—I had malaria and almost died. Plus the 
condition in China was a little uncertain at 
that time, because the warlords were fighting 
with the Chiang Kaishek. 


I had an opportunity to go back to the 
village later, and I spent a month there, which 
was an experience. There was no electricity 
and no amenities such as a bathroom or a 
shower, and the outhouse was quite a distance 
away among the bamboo groves. There was 
a common well where water was bucketed in 
and put in a large crock. We also caught rain 
water whenever we could. In the month I 
spent there, I went to a wedding, had a New 
Year’s, and went to a funeral. I also met my 
father’s first wife, and she was very kind and 
very, very generous; she accepted me as a 
daughter. She made sure that all the sisters-in- 
laws and her daughter-in-law and everybody 
treated me well—and I was treated very, very 
well. Of course, I was known as the daughter 
from America and an oddity because I had 
American clothes on. I had the saddle shoes 
and bobbie socks and bobbed hair, [laughter] 
All the outlying village people came to our 
village to look at me, because I was such an 
oddity. Can you imagine that? [laughter] The 
thing is, at the time, this mother considered 
herself the matriarch of that family, and of 



50 


Lai King Chew 


my father’s second family, too. She said I was 
a teenager, so I was old enough to be married 
off, so she decided that she would take 
responsibility of my life and future! [laughter] 
I had a nephew at that time, the son of this 
brother that had died en route to Peking. He 
was considerably older than the rest of us. 
He said, “Do you know that your mother is 
thinking of marrying you off?” 

I said “What? She can’t do that! I’m 
American, and this is not done in America.” 
But I stayed and kept my ears open, and so 
did he. 

The matriarch of the family arranged a 
marriage for my nephew, the son of my half- 
brother; he was not very happy about it. He 
did not want to marry a village girl, because 
he had a girlfriend in Canton, in the city. He 
had lived in the city, and he was satisfied with 
her. But anyway, he ended up marrying the 
girl as had been arranged—sight unseen. He 
had never seen her. But I saw her when they 
brought her to our house in the sedan chair, all 
decorated in gold and green and silver. They 
had the ceremony and they were married. 
Shortly after that, he said, “We’re leaving, 
before you get married off.” 

I said, “OK, let’s go, let’s leave!” Well, his 
mother did not want us to leave, but one 
day, unknown to them, we packed our little 
belongings, and we slipped out of the village. 
We walked and walked until we came to a 
station to take a train, [laughter] The train 
didn’t run every day; it only ran on certain 
days and certain times—it was never on time. 
So we ran and we got on that train and then we 
took a boat back to Hong Kong. From Hong 
Kong, we took another boat and went back to 
Canton where my sister Fanny had lived for 
twenty-some years. Then I got ill with malaria 
and was in the St. Paul’s hospital in Canton. 
Fanny was working as a secretary in Ting 
Nam University, and she got an American 


doctor for me, Dr. Carter. I was very seriously 
ill, and he said if I lived through the night, I 
might have a chance. And I did live through 
the night, and I recovered. 

A girlfriend I knew from California had 
been with us on the same boat to China. I 
asked for her and I learned she had died. 
When I told my sister that, she said, “You’re 
going to leave!” So, instead of attending 
Yancheng University, I came back to the 
United States. 

During the summer of 19361 had a three 
month sojourn in Europe. My husband, 
Thomas Chang, and I went to the Beaux Arts 
School in Fontainebleau, Paris, and on our 
return home, we visited Munich, Germany. 
We were unaware that Germany was in 
political turmoil at that time. Being students 
from America, we felt that we had the run 
of Europe and that we were untouchable. 
We spent time in Munich sightseeing and 
enjoyed it, and we were very surprised when 
we realized that we had been followed as soon 
as we entered Munich. 

Then we heard about Hitler being in 
Nuremberg for a big meeting. And I said, 
“Well, let’s go to Nuremberg and see Hitler!” 
[laughter] 

We got on the train, but before we arrived 
in Nuremberg, we were arrested by the 
Gestapo. The surprising thing about it was 
that we were arrested by two very well-dressed 
Germans who spoke fluent English with an 
Oxford accent. They wore tweed suits and 
smoked pipes—very English looking. One 
man pulled out his wallet and said, “We are 
from the Gestapo and we would like you to 
accompany us.” 

The next thing we knew, there were armed 
storm troopers in uniforms escorting us off 
the train before we got to Nuremberg, so we 
didn’t get to see the walled city, [laughter] 



Travels 


51 


We were held and questioned, but we didn’t 
know anything. We said, “We are students. 
We are United States citizens, and we were 
just sightseeing. We had no idea what they 
were talking about.” 

They said, “You have come to assassinate 
Hitler!” Our luggage was turned inside out, 
and every garment was taken out to see if 
we had concealed any weapons—of course, 
we had none. We had no idea what was 
happening, and we sat in that cell there for a 
whole day. Finally, they said, “You are leaving 
Nuremberg. We will accompany you as far as 
Dresden, and from there, wherever you are 
going, you will be followed.” 

So, we went to Dresden, and then we went 
to Cologne. We decided we wanted to see the 
cathedral in Cologne, and we stayed there. 
Wed gotten to a hotel, but we knew we were 
being watched. While we stayed in this hotel, 
we were told not to look out the window, 
because the windows were all draped. We 
were told that we had to be back in the room 
before dark. So we sat in the outdoor cafe to 
have something to eat in front of the cathedral 
at Cologne. 

At the table next to us there were some 
English-speaking people; they were Jews. A 
man said to us, “Please do not turn around. 
We are being watched. We know you are 
American tourists, and we own a camera 
store. We want to sell you a camera, if you 
would like one.” 

We said, “Yes, we would.” 

He said, “We’ll sell you cameras very 
cheap. We are trying to get enough money 
to leave Germany.” We asked them where we 
should meet them, and the man said, “We will 
come to your hotel with the camera; we know 
where you are staying.” 

I thought, “My goodness, what is this?” 

After dinner, we walked around and 
noticed that on some store doors and trucks 


and so forth, there were big red X marks. 
We asked someone about it and they said, 
“Those stores are owned by Jewish people.” 
We had no idea that Germany was preparing 
for war—no idea! On the streets we saw a lot 
of little children in uniform, carrying shovels, 
marching; they were exercising. Can you 
imagine that? 

All that time we didn’t have any idea of 
what was happening. When we were going 
to school, we weren’t interested in politics. It 
never dawned on us to study politics. Prince 
Edward’s abdication wasn’t even in the papers 
in Germany. We didn’t even know of his 
abdication until we got back to the United 
States. I guess we were lucky that we were 
escorted out of Germany, [laughter] Thank 
goodness! We had to hide the camera that we 
had bought. We also were not allowed to take 
any German marks out of the country, so we 
gave them away at the hotel to anybody who 
wanted the money. 

We went back to the China in 1979, but 
we weren’t allowed into Canton. I visited 
Bangkok, Singapore, Manila, Taiwan, and 
Hong Kong. I didn’t go into the mainland 
then; it was too difficult to get visas to go into 
the mainland. It was a long trip. I traveled with 
my nieces and my eldest sister in a group. 

Then I went again in 1981, I think. At 
that time it was a little more lax, and we 
went to Peking, Shanghai and Nanking. We 
went into the mainland with a tour guide 
who was a member of the Communist Party. 
We went to Xi’an in the Shaanxi Province, 
where we saw those life-sized terra cotta 
soldiers that were being excavated there. 
There were thousands of them! Emperor 
Qin Shi Huang had been buried with these 
terra cotta soldiers. [Qin Shi Huang’s dynasty 
was 259-210 B.C. In 1974 peasants digging 
a well accidentally discovered life-size terra 



52 


Lai King Chew 


cotta soldiers, chariots, and horses, as well as 
bronze weapons. In three pits 7,000 warrior 
sculptures carved with intricate detail were 
discovered—lined up in battle formation 
and buried with the emperor for his journey 
to the afterlife.] Unfortunately, no cameras 
were allowed. 

Then we went to Nanking and Soochow. 
It’s beautiful country there. We saw the 
Yangtze River and we climbed the Great Wall, 
and my ninety-something-year-old sister 
went up to the fourth tower without any effort 
while I was panting, [laughter] 

Then we went to the Ming Tomb, and we 
saw the Jade Palace, and we saw the empress 
dowager’s marble boat at the summer palace. 
While we were there, we saw some paintings 
in the museum. 

There, I learned a little history: my eldest 
sister told me our family is from the Han 
Dynasty. She had learned it from my mother, 
and my mother had learned it from her elders. 
Our ancestors were in the Han Dynasty 
Court, and the emperor there at that time 
was so jealous of all the intellectuals that he 
had a lot of them beheaded. Instead of staying 
around him to be beheaded, our ancestors 
started to emigrate. Some went east, and some 
went elsewhere within China. Our ancestors 
went south and landed in the village where 
my great, great, great grandfather established 
himself. The history of the people in that 
village is registered in a book that has been in 
the temple for generations. Even if you went 
overseas, and you sent back the birth dates of 
your sons, they were registered in the book. 

But during the communist regime, the 
temples were burned, and the books were 
all destroyed in the villages; all the ancestral 
history was destroyed. 

That year (1981) we managed to get a 
visa to go into Canton, and we were watched 
very closely—very, very closely. And the 


taxicab that we hired had to have two drivers. 
One checked up on the other to see that 
no one took bribes. The province is called 
Guangdong, and the city of Canton is now 
called Guangzhou. We went from Hong Kong 
by train. Bick Chee’s son Keurng was driving 
the city bus in Canton, so he knew the routes. 
We stopped at several places and asked about 
the routes, and wherever we stopped we were 
interrogated. They check your passport and 
look through your luggage and examine 
everything in your purse. The roads were very 
rutty and full of potholes, so we just jogged 
along. It took us about four or five hours, 
maybe six hours to get to the village. It wasn’t 
that far, only a hundred and something miles. 

I found a lot of changes from when I had 
visited as a little girl. The three houses that 
my father had had built were still there, but 
only one was occupied. The other houses were 
stripped bare. The windows that had had steel 
frames—the steel was gone, and all the gate 
on the doors were gone. Inside the house, all 
the furniture was gone. Everything was gone. 
There were a lot of cobwebs. 

Some elders came by, and I told them who 
we were, and they said, “Oh, I remember you. 
I remember when you were here so many 
years ago, when you were a little girl.” 

And I said, “Yes, I’ve come back to see 
the village.” So they took us around and told 
us that everything in the village was stripped 
bare, and the temple was stripped bare, 
and all the documents they had had there 
were all destroyed by the communists. The 
communists took furniture and everything. 
There wasn’t anything left. 

One couple, two children and an old 
woman, Edna May, were living in the middle 
house, and I went into the home, and the 
mother-in-law came to talk to me. She said, 
“Now that you are back, you want us to 
move?” 



Travels 


53 


“Oh, no,” I said. “No, I didn’t come back 
to evict you. No.” I said, “You can live here as 
long as you want.” 

And she said, “Oh, thank you!” She almost 
humbled herself and the son was bowing to 
me. I got so embarrassed. 

So, I told the village elder, “Well, this 
couple is part of the family—a younger 
generation of Eng in the village. They have 
no place to live, so they live in that house.” I 
said, “Well, let them live here as long as they 
wish. They need not pay any rent. If I should 
hear of anyone asking them for rent for our 
house, I shall be very upset and displeased.” 

They said, “Oh, very well; they can stay 
here.” In that village, they are all Engs, and 
they all come from one common ancestor. 
As far as I know, this family is still living in 
the house. 

The house has a center living room and 
two kitchens, one on the left and one on 
the right of the living room. And there’s a 
bedroom on one side, and a bedroom on 
the other side. The reason for that is that 
the older married mother lives on one side, 
and the other side is for the daughter-in-law 
when the son marries. So, the houses are in 
two parts with one center living room. In the 
living room there is a skylight, and there’s a 
courtyard where they have big water jugs to 
catch the rainwater whenever it rains. The 
house is made of a very thick sandstone, and 
the courtyard looks like granite, very heavy 
stone in thick, square slabs. In the courtyard 
they have an area for washing the vegetables, 
and there’s an opening where the water goes. 
About twenty feet away there is a pond that 
has fish and ducks in it. And there is a fresh 
water well. And there is a big tower. On top 
of the houses, there’s like a lookout. There is 
a loft and a lookout, because there was at one 
time a lot of bandits that were coming down 
from the hills. They raided and salvaged the 


villagers. And so, those lookouts in the tower 
there were for watching for bandits coming 
down the hill. If they saw bandits they would 
prepare for a fight. Even the women—they’d 
have their cleaver and their bamboo stick 
ready to fight the bandits. For awhile, way 
before the war, banditry was very prevalent. 

And each house has a little built-in altar, 
an ancestral altar, where they offer prayers and 
burn incense. As the males in the generation 
pass away, their names get put on the ancestral 
altar. The only thing the communists couldn’t 
remove was the altar. It was fastened down 
so tight, they couldn’t remove it. It was too 
heavy. So that was left. But everything else 
was stripped down. The beautiful chandelier 
that we had in the living room was taken. I 
don’t know what ever happened to it. The teak 
chairs and tables that we had were all gone. 

There are three doors at the opening— 
three different types of doors. One door is 
sort of like a gate or a security door. It slides 
open. Then we have a screen door, and then 
a solid door to close out the cold or the heat. 

Then, on the side of the houses there 
are places where you put the lanterns and 
the candles, and they had panels where they 
put a good saying. In the old days, we used 
a kerosene lamp in the living room for light, 
and there was no heat, just the stove. You go 
to bed when the sun goes down. You get up 
when the rooster crows. 

I couldn’t get used to it. I said, “Time to go 
to bed already? It’s seven o’clock!” And then, 
you’d get up at four o’clock when the rooster 
crows. I had a flashlight with me and I used 
that flashlight until the battery wore out. And 
of course, there were no sanitary facilities. 
Well, there was a common outhouse. It’s a 
huge bamboo building way off among the 
bamboo grove there. It’s a common outhouse 
for everybody. You empty your chamber pots 
in that outhouse. Everybody had chamber 



54 


Lai King Chew 


pots. We had maybe two or three. So every 
day the chamber pots were emptied into 
this outhouse. It’s a huge place dug into the 
ground, and after a certain time, the dirt is 
flung over it and you start all over again on 
top of the dirt. It’s pretty deep. And there 
are planks running across it. You have to be 
careful you don’t fall in. That was strange. 
I went and took a look. And the stench! I 
ran away. I said, “Gee, no running water, 
no flushing toilet.” I was introduced to the 
chamber pots. 

I have been back there four times, 1979, 
1981, in 1984, and then, the last time in 1992. 

The third time I went back to China, in 
1984, we were allowed to go into the mainland 
by ourselves. We visited the hospitals in 
Canton and you wouldn’t believe . . . the 
stairways were filthy dirty, and in the operating 
rooms all the instruments were exposed and 
lying on dirty trays. My friend Rusty was 
traveling with us and said, “I hope to God 
I don’t get sick here.” These were deplorable 
conditions! During this trip I also looked 
up some relatives—a great grand niece, Bick 
Chee, and a couple of elderly nieces. 

For over twenty-five years, the Chinese 
mainland had no outside communication 
with the rest of the world at all. But many 
of the overseas Chinese did receive word 
from some of their relatives in Communist 
China. (Tom Wong’s father and mother lived 
under the communist rule and had all their 
possessions taken away from them, because 
they were old and could not participate in 
the government. It ended up that the both of 
them decided it wasn’t worth living and they 
committed suicide.) Well, our village was 
under communist rule and they destroyed 
everything and confiscated all the farmland 
that our relatives had. Whatever you had in 
the house that was removable or saleable was 
removed—even the steel doors were removed. 


It was a terrible time in China, we learned 
later. 

We also found another grand niece. 
Her son tried to escape to Hong Kong 
through Macao, but he was caught by the 
communists and brought back to Canton. He 
was sentenced to three years at hard labor in 
eastern China for trying to escape. We found 
this niece living in an apartment house built 
of concrete; it was very bleak and stark. We 
knew that they lived in that area, but we had 
no idea which apartment. So we stood out in 
the street and yelled her name and said, “If 
you live here, please answer.” [laughter] That’s 
how we found them. We climbed seven floors 
to the top to her apartment. (The staircase 
was so narrow, it was only one person at a 
time.) There were no lights—you had to use a 
flashlight or a cigarette lighter or whatever you 
had in order to see while climbing the stairs. 

In the apartment they had a table and 
couple of chairs and two beds made of boards 
with bamboo mats on top. There was a tiny 
stove for cooking and a community bathroom 
with no bathtub—just a lavatory and a basin. 
The stove was more or less community, too, 
because there were other families living on 
the same floor, [laughter] Looking at the 
conditions, we felt very humble when we came 
away. We tried to give them some money, but 
we had mostly currency. They said, “Don’t 
give us U.S. money because they will want to 
know where we got it, and then they will be 
blackmailing you to send them more money.” 
Can you imagine that? So we gave them Hong 
Kong money, but we didn’t have very much. 
When you realize the condition in which they 
had to live.... 

Our family had quite a few acres of 
farming land before Deng Xiaoping (Teng 
Hsiao-Ping) came into power. When Mao 
Tse-tung was still alive all of the people’s 
produce went to the government. The 



Travels 


55 


government would allot you so much per 
house, per person, providing that person had 
worked within the work force. If you were too 
elderly or incapable of working, you were not 
given any allotment, so the members of the 
household had to share their allotments with 
the disabled. Consequently a lot of old folks 
died because there wasn’t enough food. Each 
person was allowed less than a square meter 
of cloth for clothing per year. Consequently 
they had a lot of patch-over-patch clothing. 
But later after Mao Tse-tung died in 1976 and 
Deng Xaioping took over, the government 
became more lenient. It was decreed that two- 
thirds of the crops produced on government 
land went to the government and you kept 
one-third. Furthermore, you could trade with 
your neighbors. If you were growing rice and 
your neighbors were growing sweet potatoes 
or whatever, you could trade. Also, more 
material was allowed for clothing. So they 
were better off, and the people were better fed, 
and the rules were relaxed. But still there was 
a lot of spying: neighbors trying to get into 
better relationship with the government or 
asking for favors. 

On this third trip, we also went to 
Bangkok; Bangkok had improved, and I was 
surprised. The streets were cleaner since the 
last time we’d visited in 1979. On my first visit 
to Bangkok, the streets were dirty and full 
of chuck holes. People were poor and there 
were so many motorcycles and traffic with no 
rules or regulations. But on the second trip, 
Bangkok was much improved. It was cleaner 
and they had a new airport and the streets 
were wider. Even the people were better 
dressed. That was very, very interesting. 

After Bangkok, we went to Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia, and that is really a beautiful city. 
Everywhere you go in the airport and even 
in the ads they have the slogan, “Drugs Mean 
Death.” (Kuala Lumpur and Singapore frown 


on any drugs. If you are caught with just even a 
tiny bit, you are arrested. A great many people 
tell us that all the dealers are executed with 
just a short trial.) [laughter] Kuala Lumpur is 
such a beautiful, clean city. They have a law 
against littering and spitting on the sidewalks, 
or else you will be fined heavily. In Singapore 
you are fined $250 if you litter a sidewalk. 
Consequently the sidewalks and the streets 
are clean. The weather is beautiful there; it 
is nice and warm. English is quite prevalent 
there, so you can get along very well. (I think 
in Singapore, English is practically the second 
language.) 

The last time I went to China, in 1992, 
traveling was better. The roads were kind of 
paved. We had a bus, and then Bick Chee’s son 
Keurng took us. He knows his way around 
Canton and the village and the province. 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



58 


Lai King Chew 


A 

Aggie Bar (Reno, Nevada), 32 
Archway Drugstore (Reno, 
Nevada), 41, 65 


Brown, Stan, 56-57 
Bryan, Richard H., 84 
Bucket of Blood Bar (Reno, 
Nevada), 32 

Bundox Restaurant (Reno, 
Nevada), 79, 81-82 


B 


Bangkok, Thailand, 101 
Bank Club (Reno, Nevada), 
32, 40-41, 78 
Banker’s Cafe (Reno, 
Nevada), 41, 65 
Benetti brothers, 37 
Berrum, Ted, 49, 63 
Besnilian, Simon “Sam,” 24 
Bonavena, Oscar, 71 
Briscoe, Elmer, 53-54, 63 
Brodhead, Hwa-di, 20, 22-23, 
74 

Brodhead, John, 23 
Brodhead, Lynus, 23 
Brodhead, Michael, 



Canton, China, 7, 9-12, 17, 
91, 94-95, 98-99 
Chang, Cherk II., 20, 22-24, 
67, 74 

Chang, Thomas, 18, 91 
Chcc, Bick, 10-12, 95, 9 
Chew, Charles, 23-24 
34-35, 48, 

Chin,' 

Chir 

Ington), 24 
eno, Nevada), 

oy family, 75-76, 78, 80-82 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


59 


Christmas Tree Restaurant 
(Mt. Rose Highway, 
Nevada), 31 
Club Cal-Neva (Reno, 
Nevada), 28, 56 
Cobb, Ty, 61 
College of Saint Theresa 
(Winona, Minnesota), 17- 
18 

College of William and Mary 
(Williamsburg, Virginia), 
18 

Cologne, Germany, 92-93 
Colony Club (Reno, Nevada), 
41,62 

Commercial Row (Reno, 
Nevada), 31-32, 38, 40-41, 
47-50, 52 

Communist China, 8, 99 
Corner Bar (Reno, Nevada), 
32, 34, 38, 48 

Cosmo Club (Reno, Nevada), 
5, 32-64, 70, 78 
Cowan, Charles, 31, 35, 63 
Craven, Margaret, 

Craven, Thomas 
35, 


E 


El Cortez Hotel (Reno, 
Nevada), 62 
El Rio Club (Las Vegas, 
Nevada), 34 

Eldorado Hotel-Casino (Reno, 
Nevada), 41 
Eng, Benjamin, 3, 13 
Eng, Bing, 8 

Eng, Della, 3, 5-6,13, 22 
Eng family, 2, 96 
Eng, Fanny, 3, 12, 91 
Eng, Harry, 3, 13 
Eng, Hock Gan, 1-9,13-14,16 
Eng, James “Jimmy,” 3, 13, 
34,36 

Eng, Jenny, 6 
Eng, Richard, 7-8 
Eng, William, 



3t Bar (Reno, Nevada), 32 
Douglas Alley (Reno, 

Nevada), 38-41, 62 
Douglass, Jack R., 30-31, 34, 
37,42 

Dresden, Germany, 92 


. Naval Air Station 
(Nevada), 70 
Fallon, Nevada, 70, 72 
Farrell, Abe, 58 
Farris, Howard, 63 
Figonl, Al, 40 
Fitzgerald, Lincoln, 61 
Fong, Ann, 83 

Fong, Bew “Bill,” 39, 54, 62, 
77-78, 81-82 
Fong, Leon, 58 
Fong, Phillip, 31, 34 
Foo, Leon “Boba,” 35-36 
Foo, Tsanz Yong, 21-22 
Frontier Club (Reno, 
Nevada), 41 



60 


Lai King Chew 


Gee, T.F. “Mr. Gee,” 61, 75- 
76, 78, 80, 82, 84 
Geyer, G. William, 62, 68 
Golden Hotel-Casino (Reno, 
Nevada), 33, 40-41, 62 
Golden Reef Hotel (Reno, 
Nevada), 40 

Goon, Wong Ling, 1-3, 6, 8- 
10,13-17, 89 
Gray, Leslie B., 66-67, 87 
Gray, Reid, and Wright Store 
(Reno, Nevada), 41 
Gregory, Prank B., 66-67 
Guangdong, China, 1, 95 
Guangzhou, China. See 
Canton 

Guild, Clark, 56, 84, 87 
Gus’s Place (Reno, Nevada), 
38 



Han . 

1, 48, 67 
40, 52, 63 
(Reno, Nevada), 
>8, 33, 40-41, 55, 61-62, 
65, 72 
Ilarrah, William F., 64 
Harrah’s Club (Reno, 

Nevada), 28, 32-33, 39, 
41,62 

Harris, Leonard H. “Len,” 63 
Hitler, Adolph, 92 
Hole in the Wall Bar and 
Restaurant (Reno, 
Nevada), 34, 38 
Hong Kong, China, 7-9,12-14, 
91, 94-95, 99-100 


Hop Sing Tong (Reno, 
Nevada), 85-86 
Horseshoe Club (Reno, 
Nevada), 41 
Hughes, Eugene, 34-35 
Hughes, Frank, 34 
Hughes, Jay, 34-35 
Hume, Red, 60-61 


Japanese, 7, 9, 12 
Jews, 93 
Joss House Society (Reno, 
Nevada), 77, 79-87 


1 90 
£ 40 

’s Squeeze Inn, 40, 55 
Lo, Alice, 77 
Ko, Tim, 77 

Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 101 
Kum Yow, Maya, 19 
Kwangsi, China, 12 


Lake Street (Reno, Nevada), 
32,38-41,47-48,51-52, 
62, 75 

Lake Tahoe (Nevada), 33-34 
Las Vegas, Nevada, 33-34 
Loomis, E. Frandsen “Bud,” 
82 

Lou, Ilong, 24 
Lu, Kern, 17-18 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


61 


Luce, Bill, 36 
Lumpkin, Kiah, 40 


Osborn, Al, 52 

Owl Club (Reno, Nevada), 36 


M 


Manning, Robert, 50, 54 
Mapes, Charles W. Jr., 84 
Melton, Rollan, 61 
Mint Club (Reno, Nevada), 39 
Munich, Germany, 92 


National Bowling Stadium 
(Reno, Nevada), 40 
Nelson, Warren, 56-57 
Nevada Club (Reno, Nevada), 
32, 60, 62 

Nevada Novelty Company, 
31,37 

New China Club (Reno, 
Nevada), 33, 37-40, 62 
New York City, 18 
New York Unive 
Nugget (Pi 

Nugget (Si iva'&X 28 

lay, 92 


Palace Club (Fallon, Nevada), 
66-67 

Palace Club (Reno, Nevada), 
33, 35 

Pioneer Hotel (Reno, 
Nevada), 34 

Port Townsend, Washington, 
1-4 

Probasco Homes (Sparks, 
Nevada), 30 



O’Callaghan, Donal N. “Mike,” 
71 

Oddie Boulevard (Sparks, 
Nevada), 30 
Oeding, Chuck, 69, 73 
Olympic games (Winter 
1960), 87-88 


Rancho San Rafael Regional 
Park (Reno, Nevada), 84 
Reno, Nevada, 26-64 
Riverside Hotel-Casino 
(Reno, Nevada), 30, 42 


S 


Sagebrush Club (Fallon, 
Nevada), 67-74 
San Francisco, California, 17, 
21-22, 32 

Santa Fe Hotel (Reno, 
Nevada), 38, 45, 62 



62 


Lai King Chew 


Scott, Eddie B., 67 
Seattle, Washington, 3-4, 13, 
15-16, 22, 24-25, 28-29 
Seevers, Della, 35 
Sferrazza, Peter, 84 
Sierra Turf Club, 41 
Silver Legacy (Reno, Nevada), 
41 

Singapore, Asia, 101 
Six Company (Reno, Nevada), 
85-86 

Smernoff, Noah, 87 


U 

University of Nevada, Reno, 
48-49 


Virginia Street (Reno, 
Nevada), 28, 40-41,52, 
76-77, 87-88 



Nevada), 39 
Tse-tung, Mao, 100 
Tun, Wally, 77, 82, 84 


Yip, Joe, 39-40 
Yong, Chuck, 22 
Young, C. Clifton, 83-84, 87 
Yup, Henry, 76, 82, 84, 86 




