Howard D. McKibben 


Interviewee: Howard D. McKibben 
Interviewed: 2005-2006; 2008 
Published: 2013 
Interviewer: Brad Williams 
UNOHP Catalog #225 


Description 

Born April 1, 1940, in Virginia, Illinois, Howard McKibben lived at The Baby Fold orphanage in Normal, Illinois, 
until 1942, when he and his sister, Marian, were adopted by James and Bernice McKibben. Judge McKibben’s father 
was superintendent of schools, and his mother was an English and Latin teacher. Throughout his oral history, Judge 
McKibben expresses his gratitude to his adoptive parents for the love and values that inform his life and career, and 
adoption remains an important advocacy issue for him. 

Judge McKibben describes an idyllic Midwestern childhood, and repeats the themes of the importance of doing your 
best and enjoying what you do. In school, athletics were important, and he acquired an early appreciation for poetry 
and literature. A track scholarship sent him to Bradley University (BS 1962), then to the University of Pittsburgh 
for a masters of public administration (MPA 1964). Law school at the University of Michigan (JD 1967) followed. 

Coming to Nevada with his new wife, Mary Ann, he practiced law, but public service was always in his mind. Judge 
McKibben transitioned from private practice to serving as a deputy district attorney for Douglas County. In 1971, 
he was elected district attorney and served until 1977. When he was asked to run for election to the state court, he 
was elected and served from 1977 to 1984. Judge McKibben’s experiences as a district attorney and a state court 
judge honed his philosophy and opinions about jury and trial procedure. 

In 1984, President Ronald Reagan appointed Judge McKibben to the U. S. District Court for the District of Nevada. 
His years as a state court judge were good preparation for the federal trial bench—he knew his values and principles, 
and he knew how to run a courtroom. Whether on the bench, overseeing the administration of his court, or 
committee responsibilities, family is important in Judge McKibben’s life. He proudly acknowledges his wife, Mary 
Ann, and their children, Mark and Susan, for their help and support in his success. 

The oral history interviews with the Hon. Howard D. McKibben were part of the Nevada Legal Oral History Project, 
a joint effort of the Nevada Judicial Historical Society, the Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical Society, and the University 
of Nevada Oral History Program. 



Howard D. McKibben 




Howard D. McKibben 


An Oral History Conducted by Brad Williams 
Edited by Patricia A. Cooper-Smith 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 2013 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp@unr.edu 
http: / / www.unr.edu/ oralhistory 

Nevada Judicial Historical Society 
Carson City, Nevada 89701 

Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical Society 
Pasadena, California 91105 


All rights reserved. Published 2013. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 

Director: Alicia Barber 
Production Assistant: Karen Frazier 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words maybe quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface ix 

Introduction xi 

1. Childhood through College Years 1 

2. Graduate and Law Schools 19 

3. Nevada: A New Lawyer and District Attorney 27 

4. The Bench 33 

5. Trial Procedure 39 


6. Reflections as a Federal Judge 


45 




Preface 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Howard D. McKibben 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 



Introduction 


Born April 1, 1940, in Virginia, Illinois, 
Howard McKibben lived at The Baby Fold 
orphanage in Normal, Illinois, until 1942, 
when he and his sister, Marian, were adopted 
by James and Bernice McKibben. Judge 
McKibben’s father was superintendent of 
schools, and his mother was an English and 
Latin teacher. Throughout his oral history, 
Judge McKibben expresses his gratitude to 
his adoptive parents for the love and values 
that inform his life and career, and adoption 
remains an important advocacy issue for him. 

From picking berries and fruit, mowing 
lawns, baling hay, detasseling corn, and 
measuring for farm subsidies to saving money 
for school and the occasional movie and 
root beer at the drugstore, Judge McKibben 
describes an idyllic Midwestern childhood. 
He talks about the importance of doing 
your best and enjoying what you do. In 
school, athletics were important, and he 
acquired an early appreciation for poetry 
and literature. A track scholarship sent him 
to Bradley University (BS 1962), then to 
the University of Pittsburgh for a master’s 


of public administration (MPA 1964). Law 
school at the University of Michigan (JD 
1967) followed. 

While in law school, he met Mary Ann 
Scott. It was love at first sight. In his own 
words, Judge McKibben says, “I didn’t want the 
music to stop.... We were very much in love 
and it was a nice journey.” The newlyweds—a 
new lawyer and a new librarian—came west, 
settling in Minden, Nevada. Public service 
was always in his mind, and it wasn’t long until 
McKibben transitioned from private practice 
to serving as a deputy district attorney for 
Douglas County. In 1971, he was elected 
district attorney and served until 1977. When 
he was asked to run for election to the state 
court, he was elected without opposition to 
the Ninth Judicial District Court for the State 
of Nevada, serving from 1977 to 1984. Judge 
McKibben’s experiences as a district attorney 
and a state court judge honed his philosophy 
and opinions about jury and trial procedure. 
Jurors rank high on his list—they are “the 
best goodwill ambassadors we have in the 
community.” 



Howard D. McKibben 


xii 


In 1984, President Ronald Reagan 
appointed Judge McKibben to the U. S. 
District Court for the District of Nevada. At 
the suggestion of then-Senator Paul Laxalt 
to express his interest in the position, on a 
trip and without a typewriter available, Judge 
McKibben handwrote a letter. The traditional 
and personal touch did not go unnoticed. 
His years as a state court judge were good 
preparation for the federal trial bench—he 
knew his values and principles, and he knew 
how to run a courtroom. A favorite childhood 
book, The Little Engine That Could, guides his 
work ethic that “you can always be successful 
if you work hard. ... As long as you think 
you can do something and... put your mind 
to it, you probably can.” As a judge, he tries 
to follow what a mentor, Judge Roger Foley, 
said: that a good judge has a “kind and gentle 
heart.” 

Whether on the bench, overseeing the 
administration of his court, or committee 
responsibilities, family is important in Judge 
McKibben’s life. He proudly acknowledges 
his wife, Mary Ann, and their children, Mark 
and Susan, for their help and support in his 
success. 

For readers who are interested in 
examining the unaltered records, copies of 
the recorded interviews are available at the 
Special Collections department of the UNR 
Library. 

Brad Williams conducted oral history 
interviews with the Hon. Howard D. McKibben 
from September 2005 to December 2006, with 
an additional interview in March 2008, at 
Judge McKibben’s chambers in Reno, Nevada. 
The interviews were conducted as part of the 
Nevada Legal Oral History Project, a joint 
effort of the Ninth Judicial Circuit Historical 
Society (NJCHS), the Nevada Judicial 
Historical Society (NJHS), and the UNOHP. 
Begun in 2001, the project was intended to 


record the life stories of leading members of 
Nevada’s legal profession and to educate the 
public about law and the courts by making 
those stories widely available through various 
media. 

Members of the boards of NJHS and 
NJCHS compiled and vetted lists of potential 
narrators, ultimately selecting representatives 
from both the state and federal benches and 
bars. The UNOHP, under the direction of 
Tom King and his successor Mary Larson, 
recommended interviewers, most of whom 
were professional oral historians, and donated 
equipment and transcription services. Brad 
Williams, of NJCHS, coordinated the project 
from its inception. Susan Southwick, of NJHS, 
oversaw that group’s participation. Patricia 
Cooper-Smith completed the copyediting 
and introductions. Alicia Barber, Director 
of the UNOHP since 2009, supervised the 
project’s final publication and dissemination. 
The project was made possible by a generous 
challenge grant from the John Ben Snow 
Memorial Trust, with matching funds 
provided by the U.S. District Court for 
Nevada Attorney Admissions Fund, the 
Washoe County Courthouse Preservation 
Fund, and the Nevada State Bar. Thanks go to 
Susan Southwick and the Board of Trustees of 
NJHS, and Brad Williams, who interviewed 
Judge McKibben. 

Patricia A. Cooper-Smith 
Carson City, Nevada 
June 2013 




Hon. Howard D. McKibben, 

U. S. District Judge, District of Nevada, 2008 


(Courtesy of Cooks Photography) 




1 


Childhood through 
College Years 


Brad Williams: This is the beginning of our 
oral history with United States District Judge 
Howard D. McKibben. Today is September 29, 
2005. Were in Judge McKibben’s chambers in 
Reno, Nevada. Good afternoon, Judge. 

Howard McKibben: How are you, Brad? 
I’m delighted to have this opportunity to 
reflect on years that I’ve forgotten about, so 
it’s nice to be here. 

It’s very nice for me to be here, and I’m glad to 
have this opportunity to talk to you about your 
life and about your career. I want to begin by 
asking you quite simply when you were born. 

I was born on April 1, 1940 in Virginia, 
Illinois, which is a small rural community in 
south central Illinois. I was an April Fool’s 
child. 

What was Virginia, Illinois, like? 

I lived there about two years of my life, 
so I really don’t have any recollection. I have 


since gone back to visit, and it’s a very small 
town of less than a thousand people. It is 
surrounded by farmland. 

In 1941, my sister and I were taken to live 
at The Baby Fold, which was an orphanage 
in Normal, Illinois. I was so young I really 
can’t remember much about that period. The 
Baby Fold is still in Normal. This last year, I 
gave a talk at their Founder’s Day banquet. 
It was really quite an emotional experience 
because the whole process of adoption has 
had a very significant impact on my life. 

I was about two years old at the time that 
my sister and I were taken to the Baby Fold. 
My sister’s name is Marian, and she and I 
were not separated. We had two other half- 
sisters, Peggy and Hazel, and we did not see 
them again for many, many years after that. 
I was at the Baby Fold along with my sister 
for approximately six or seven months in 
1942. 

In October of 1942, James Dewey 
McKibben and Bernice Brown McKibben, 
who were living in Clinton, Illinois, which 
was not far from Normal in central Illinois, 



2 


Howard D. McKibben 


came to the Baby Fold. They wished to adopt 
a child. They were told that there were two 
children for adoption, a brother and a sister, 
and the Baby Fold didn’t want to separate 
them. 

No, this is very interesting. 

James and Bernice McKibben were 
in their mid to late forties and they were 
concerned about adopting more than one 
child. As they have told us, they went home 
and thought about it. Fortunately for us they 
decided, “Well, we can raise two children,” 
and they returned to the Baby Fold and told 
them they wished to adopt us. That was in 
October 1942. In November of 1942, we were 
placed in their home in Clinton, Illinois. The 
adoption was finalized in McLean County 
Court in 1943. 

My father was a superintendent of the 
school district in Clinton, and my mother 
was an English and Latin teacher. She wasn’t 
teaching at the time because she stayed home 
to take care of my sister and me. I would have 
been two at the time. We lived in Clinton 
until 1948, when I finished the second grade. 
We then moved to Oneida, Illinois, which is 
north of Peoria about fifty miles. It’s in the 
northwestern part of Illinois. That’s where I 
lived then until I graduated from high school 
in 1958. 

This is an unusual childhood, and I imagine 
one that has a lot of emotional resonance, as 
you suggested when you went back to the Baby 
Fold to talk to them on their anniversary. Do 
you want to tell me the circumstances of you 
and your sister being put up for adoption? 

All I really know is that our biological 
mother’s name was Sara Shaw. 


Let me ask you Judge, about your father, James 
McKibben. Tell me a little bit about him. What 
kind of a man was he? 

My father James McKibben and my 
mother, Bernice, were obviously the two most 
influential people in my life until I met and 
married Mary Ann, my wife. He was born on 
a farm outside of Oneida, Illinois in 1897. He 
tells us that he was out in the yard and watched 
Halley’s comet when it came through. That 
would have been around 1911. He recounts 
how he saw the very first automobile, a Model 
A, coming down a dirt road on his farm. His 
uncle had driven it from Chicago. It was a 
great experience because until that time, all 
they really had were horses and buggies and 
that’s how they got around. So it was quite a 
thrill for him. 

They lived on a farm outside of Oneida, 
and he and his brother and sisters helped 
farm, helped his mother and father farm. Then 
he taught at a small school called Fossmeyer 
[phonetic] outside of Oneida. He did that in 
order to earn enough money so he could go 
to college. He taught the twelve grades in a 
one-room school. He saved his money and 
then he enrolled at the University of Chicago 
where he received his undergraduate degree. 

Then after he graduated from Chicago, 
he taught in Varna, Illinois, for several years. 
That’s where he met my mother, who also was 
a teacher there. She had gone to Knox College 
in Illinois for either one or two years. After 
that, she finished her education at DePauw 
University. Then she taught English and Latin 
in Varna. Dad was a science and physics 
teacher. They met in Varna and ultimately 
were married while he was still at Varna. 

Dad then moved to Galesburg, Illinois, in 
Knox County. He ran for county superintendent 
of schools and was elected. He was elected on 



Childhood through College Years 


3 


the Democratic ticket. He liked to joke about 
that because years later he became a registered 
Republican. He thought that was quite a 
victory, and it really was in those days, and 
even today, because Knox County is one of the 
traditional Republican strongholds in Illinois. 
To go there and be elected as a Democrat 
was quite a feat. He served as Knox County 
superintendent of schools for four years. 
They then moved to Clinton and Dad became 
superintendent of schools in Clinton. And of 
course, that’s where we pick up the story, when 
Mother and Dad adopted my sister and me 
and we became a family in Clinton. 

Is Marian older than you? 

Marian is a year and a half younger than 
I am. 

Tell me a little bit about your mother, Bernice. 

Mother was born in Varna, Illinois. 
Mother’s maiden name was Bernice Brown. 
Her mother, my grandmother, Olive Held 
Brown, just epitomizes a grandmother. She 
had a beautiful and kind personality and she 
loved her grandchildren. She had a wonderful 
home. When I was growing up, I thought it 
was one of the largest homes I’d ever seen. In 
truth, it was not that large, but it was in my 
mind. Our families would gather there for 
Christmas every year. Grandmother grew up 
on a farm outside of Varna. We would go out 
there, and ride in sleighs pulled by horses. It 
was just a marvelous experience. Probably, of 
all the memories I have, those are some of the 
most acute and wonderful memories of fun 
times with cousins. 

My grandfather owned the hardware store 
in Varna. We would have a fun time going to 
the store and climbing around the ladders. 


How far was Varna from Oneida? 

When I was very young, it seemed like a 
long distance. It was actually about sixty miles. 
But in those days, it would be a two-hour 
ride. We didn’t get over there that often. We 
didn’t travel a lot. I think we went to Chicago 
once and sometimes we would go to a lake in 
Wisconsin for a vacation. Then, in 1950, we 
took a long trip to San Francisco. That was 
about the only big trip that we had as I was 
growing up. 

Oneida, is that corn-growing country? 

It is. Knox County is probably the premier 
corn county in all of the Midwest. Some of the 
richest soil in the country, I think, is in Knox 
County. 

When we moved to Oneida, there were 
four towns that had individual high schools. In 
1948, as superintendent of the school district, 
my father helped form the consolidated 
school district of the four towns. It was called 
ROVA, R-O-V-A. The communities were Rio, 
Oneida, Victoria, and Altona. It was quite a 
task for him to be able to convince people 
to consolidate and to be able to administer 
this consolidated district and start it from 
scratch. From everything I could tell—of 
course, I was young, but in retrospect, too, 
talking with people, he did a marvelous job 
in consolidating the district. 

I imagine that in those days, in 1948,1949, that 
was a very progressive idea. 

It was. It really was. And of course, he was 
an educator all his life. I know that he very 
much enjoyed what he was doing. When I 
went to high school, the district had completed 
the consolidation of a new high school. We 



4 


Howard D. McKibben 


moved out of the smaller school and started 
as freshman in the new school. So we had four 
full years in the new high school. The other 
students used to laugh and say that I had some 
influence over my father in making sure that 
we got that high school built in time so I could 
have four years there. It wasn’t the truth at all, 
but that’s the way they perceived it. 

Sure, sure. That’s interesting. Tell me a little 
bit about some of these jobs you had in and 
around Oneida. 

I started probably when I was about eight 
years old. I picked berries and fruits, apples 
and peaches and strawberries. I can remember 
that was the first job I had. After that, I worked 
bagging groceries at the grocery store across 
the tracks. Oneida was a community that was 
on Highway 34, which was a major highway 
through Illinois. The CB&Q also ran right 
through the middle of Oneida, and we were 
on the south side of the tracks. 

You better tell me what the CB&Q is. 

That would be the Chicago, Burlington, 
Quincy Railroad. It ran all the way from 
Chicago to San Francisco. It had a major 
switching yard, along with the Santa Fe, 
in Galesburg, which was about fifteen 
miles from Oneida. There were a number 
of people who worked for the railroad in 
our communities. But it was primarily an 
agricultural community. 

After I had those early odd jobs, I mowed 
lawns. I think I mowed seven or eight lawns. I 
had a little hand mower. Then finally I got my 
big job, which was to work on farms, baling 
hay. By the time I got to be about, I would 
say, twelve or thirteen. We would milk cows 
early and then I would feed the hogs and we 
would go out and bale hay. I would load it 


on the wagons and then stack the hay in the 
haymows. I did that for a number of years. 

As I got older, I was able to drive the 
tractors. In those days, as long as you didn’t 
go out on the highway, you could drive the 
tractors. One of the most embarrassing things 
that happened to me was when I was asked to 
go in early in the morning and pick up feed at 
the elevator, which was right along the CB&Q 
Railroad. I went in with the wagon, and when 
I came back, I looked in the wagon and saw 
the wagon was half full, and I couldn’t figure 
out what happened. I’d forgotten to fully close 
the tailgate, so there was a trail of grain all 
the way from the grain bin down to the farm. 
If ever there was circumstantial evidence of 
neglect or negligence that was it. 

My boss was not very happy with me, but 
I told him that I would pay him back for the 
grain that I lost. But fortune intervened the 
next day. He was backing up a tractor and I 
was holding the tongue of the wagon. It was 
a clutch tractor. As he came back, the clutch 
stuck and he yelled. I could see the tractor 
was coming back on me. I did a vertical leap 
that put me right up into the wagon. He came 
back and crushed the tongue of the wagon 
and crushed the front part of the wagon. I just 
escaped being injured. After that, he totally 
forgot about the incident with the grain and, 
as I say, I think fortune intervened for me that 
day. [laughter] 

You were lucky in several ways. 

I was. 

Was there any seed corn grown around there? 
Did you ever serve on a tasseling crew? 

I did. As a matter of fact, my sister and I 
both detasseled corn. I was on the walking 
crew and she was more fortunate. I thought 



Childhood through College Years 


5 


it was a form of discrimination, frankly. All 
of the young girls that detasseled got to ride 
on these big rigs and just sit there and pull 
the tassels from the top. The cornfields could 
get really hot and muggy, and I was fairly 
short. I was probably five-six at the time. 
I’d have to reach up and pull those tassels 
down, and they’d shake in your face. It was 
not a pleasant task, but we made good money 
detasseling corn, and that’s why we liked the 
work. 

I did that for probably two summers. I’d 
have to get up at four-thirty in the morning. 
I’ve always been an early morning person, I 
think, because of that. To this day, I still get 
up around five-thirty or so in the morning. 

Those early habits tend to stick with you. 

Oh, they do. The other job that I had in 
connection with farming that I was not crazy 
about was pulling velvet weeds out of the 
bean fields. Of course, we had the corn, the 
beans, the hay, and the oats. I’d have to go out 
in the bean fields and walk along the rows and 
cut out the weeds and the vines would tear 
your legs. My legs would be bloody by the 
end of the day. I’d go through a pair of jeans 
about every three or four weeks. That was 
not a pleasant task. We had machetes that we 
used to whack the corn out of the bean fields, 
and then we’d pull the velvet weeds with our 
gloves. That would be hard on our hands. 
You really appreciate, when you work those 
hours under those conditions, some of the 
finer things in life once in a while, [laughter] 

When you don’t have to get up at four-thirty 
in the morning. It’s hard work. 

It is. 

Farming is hard work. 


It really is. I developed such a great 
affection for people who farm. They rely on 
the weather. Regardless of those conditions, 
they go out and do the best that they can to 
plant and harvest the crops. 

Another job I had during the summer was 
to work with the Agricultural Stabilization 
Conservation Service. I would plat out the 
areas that the farmers were required to take 
out of production in order to obtain farm 
subsidies. Then I’d go out to the farm with the 
tape measures and work with the farmers to 
designate the areas that would be taken out 
of the rotation for crop allotments. I enjoyed 
meeting and talking with the farmers. 

In those days, one of the major topics 
of discussion was Everett Dirksen. He was 
a Senator from Illinois. They called him 
“Mellifluous Ev,” and it was just great to 
listen to the farmers tell us all the tales about 
Dirksen. He grew up in Pekin, Illinois, which 
was close to Galesburg. He was revered in that 
area. Sometimes I had trouble getting my job 
done on time because we’d get engaged in all 
those wonderful stories. 

The other thing that surprised me at the 
time involved the types of subsidies farmers 
received. They would be paid to take some of 
their land out of production. I was involved 
with that program. Another friend of mine 
was involved in a program that provided 
subsidies for fertilizer so the farmers could 
increase their yield. The crops that they’d 
produce would be about the same, but there’d 
be a double subsidy there. It was probably was 
a good thing, because farmers were becoming 
a dying breed. 

The small family unit, I think, was very 
healthy. And I still believe today that I had a 
most wonderful foundation growing up in a 
small community where you knew everyone, 
where you had a work ethic like I’ve described, 
where you get up early in the morning like 



6 


Howard D. McKibben 


that. You get together at the socials in the 
small churches in our communities. The 
women would bring wonderful pies and 
desserts and all of the foods and the hams, 
the fresh tomatoes, corn on the cob, and fried 
chicken. You really savor those times. 

When I was baling hay we would work 
from sunup to sundown. At noontime, youd 
go to one of the homes and all of the spouses 
would be there with this lavish lunch. The 
food was just extraordinary: fresh tomatoes, 
fresh corn, everything you could ask for, and 
wonderful chicken. We just never wanted to go 
back to work in the afternoons, but we had to. 

One of the other vivid memories I had 
growing up was sitting in the haymow when 
it was raining. Wed have to come in out of 
the hayfields, and we’d go into the barns, 
and many of the barns had tin roofs, and 
you would just he there in the haymow and 
listen to the rain pounding down on that 
tin roof. Anytime I get stressed, I think of 
those peaceful moments; of that rain coming 
down on the tin roof. It’s a very peaceful and 
a tranquil thought. 

It sounds very bucolic. 

Yes, it does, [laughs] 

Whose idea was it for you to have these 
different jobs? 

I don’t recall that anybody really asked 
me to do anything like that. I just recall that 
I thought it was important to be able to make 
enough money so that I could save for school, 
number one, and, two, have enough spending 
money so I could enjoy things a little bit. We 
had a little movie theater in that town, and 
right next to it was a drugstore. They had 
the most wonderful root beer there at the 


drugstore. It was in the old mugs that were 
chilled. The druggist would get them out 
and they had frost on them. It cost a nickel 
for a mug of root beer. I wanted to save up 
my money so I could go there and buy root 
beers and go to the movies. They had movies 
of Abbott and Costello. Those were really fun 
things to do in those days. 

And it sounds like your friends were doing the 
same sort of things. 

They were. All of our friends were. A good 
number of my friends, closest friends, lived 
on farms. Even though we lived in town, I just 
really enjoyed the farms. 

Did your mother ever go back to teaching? 

She did. She did not go back to teaching 
until my sister and I were in school. In 
Oneida, we went to grade school from the 
third grade through the sixth grade. 

And she must have taught at the high school. 

She did. As a matter of fact, when I was a 
freshman, she was teaching Latin. I ended up 
taking Spanish instead of Latin. But looking 
back on it, I wish I’d taken Latin because 
she would have been a wonderful teacher. 
I’m sure that even though she’d have been 
very demanding, it would have been a great 
experience. But she was able to teach me some 
at home, so I benefitted from that. 

When you were in elementary school up to the 
sixth grade or so, are there any teachers from 
that time that stand out in your mind? 

My fifth-grade teacher was very relaxed 
and we got to do just about anything we 



Childhood through College Years 


7 


wanted to. I thought she was just the most 
wonderful teacher because she would just 
basically let us do whatever we wanted to 
do in class. When I started the sixth grade, 
it was a rude awakening. Our teacher was 
quite demanding. And looking back on it, I 
learned a lot more in the sixth grade than I 
did the fifth grade. 

We had a wonderful high school teacher 
by the name of Miss Parkinson. She taught 
English and literature. I was just very taken by 
her approach to teaching. Among other things 
she taught us, was the “Preposition Song.” 

Do you remember that? 

I think I could actually recite it. We were 
told it has many of the prepositions in the 
English language in it and it goes as follows, 
if I recall: 

With, on, for, after, at, by, in 
Against, instead, of, near, between 
By, off, from, under, down, below 
Through, over, up, according, to 
Beside, abroad, beneath, upon, are 
prepositions, every one. 

Beside, abroad, beneath, upon, are 
prepositions, every one. 

Aboard, across, beyond, about 
Before, behind, within, without 
Around, among, amidst, above 
Toward, notwithstanding, into, of 
Bedside, abroad, beneath, upon are 
prepositions, every one. 

That’s wonderful. That’s absolutely wonderful. 
I never heard that. 

I graduated in 1958. I went back for my 
forty-fifth reunion, and Miss Parkinson, who 
now is Mrs. McNeil was there. And I asked 


everybody to recite the “Preposition Song.” 
She was just thrilled that many of us still 
remembered it. 

She introduced us to literature. She made 
literature and poetry really come alive for us. 
I enjoyed poetry, particularly Robert Frost. I 
liked Frost’s “The Road Not Taken.” We used 
to discuss it in class. She really was a very 
significant influence on my life. She and my 
mother instilled in me the beauty of literature 
and poetry. At that time, my life was centered 
around athletics. She gave me another part of 
a discipline that I found really enjoyable and 
something that has stayed with me forever. So 
I have to say she was a very influential force 
in my life during that period of time. 

Being from Illinois, did you read Sandburg or 
Edgar Lee Masters? 

I did. As a matter of fact, Carl Sandburg 
lived in Galesburg. I’ve been to his home. He 
was revered in that area. He came from very 
humble beginnings. I’m trying to remember. 
Edgar Lee Masters, I think, wrote “The Spoon 
River Anthology,” and, of course, the Spoon 
River was within about forty miles of my 
home. My dad and I even fished along the 
Spoon River during those early years. 

In addition to the poetry, were there novels 
that you were introduced to that you were 
intrigued by? 

Chaucer was one thing that we spent 
some time with and I had a little trouble with 
the old English. 

Everybody does. Did you read any Twain at 
that time? 

Oh yes. Oh yes. We read .... 



8 


Howard D. McKibben 


Because that’s Twain country. 

I think probably when we were in junior 
high, we were reading Tom Sawyer and 
Huckleberry Finn. We went to Hannibal for a 
visit and saw the whitewashed fence. And of 
course, I spent some time on the Mississippi 
River during the period while I was in high 
school. Wed go over to the Mississippi River 
and water-ski. If we fell off the skis, we tried 
not to drink the water. 

There were strip mines in our area. The 
cranes had immense buckets. I remember 
when my dad first took my sister and me 
out to see the strip mines where they had 
been digging for coal. You could put three or 
four cars in the buckets of the large cranes. 
I was just amazed to see a bucket that large 
on a piece of equipment. For reclamation, 
after they finished strip mining, the crater 
they had dug would fill with water and those 
were our swimming holes. Very dangerous 
because they were very deep, but we enjoyed 
the swimming. 

The other thing we did, was pick berries. 
We called them dewberries. They were 
much larger than a blackberry and they were 
prevalent in the slough areas. My dad and I 
would take our buckets and fill them with 
those berries. They were the sweetest form 
of blackberry I’ve ever had in my life. They 
were so abundant. You could just shake the 
berries into the pails. We’d bring them home 
and Mother would make pie with them, or 
cobbler. And then she would use the rest of 
them to make jam. 

We had a cellar downstairs. Almost 
everybody had cellars to keep their canned 
goods and also to seek shelter from storms 
and tornadoes. Now, I never did go through 
a tornado, but my father did. He described it 
for us. He was a teenager on the farm, and a 
black funnel cloud approached their home. 


He went down into the cellar with his family. 
When they came back up he saw the lamp 
pole in their yard had been snapped off. But, 
the portion of it that was still there had two 
pieces of straw in it and the straw had gone all 
the way through the post with the force of the 
tornado. You can duplicate it with a potato. 
Take a straw and push it through without 
breaking the straw. But to take a straw, and 
how fragile that is, and have it go through a 
post with that velocity and still be intact was 
amazing. And he described that for us. 

Yes, that is amazing. That is amazing. You 
mentioned that you were very athletic and 
you were oriented towards athletics in school 
and high school. Did you participate in team 
sports or... . 

Our competitive sports were football, 
basketball, baseball, and track. I lettered in all 
of those sports. There were a total of sixteen 
letters you could receive in high school, and 
I think I received fifteen. I was on the varsity 
football, basketball, and track team my 
freshman year. We didn’t have a baseball team 
until my sophomore year. I enjoyed sports a 
great deal. 

We almost won the Little Six Conference 
in football my junior year. We did win the 
conference in track. My senior year, there 
were scouts from the University of Illinois 
in the stands watching our football game 
against Knoxville. I was doing rather well as 
a halfback and our quarterback, Steve Cox, 
was also doing well. I remember I scored a 
touchdown on the first play. On our next 
possession, I tried to avoid a tackle and tore 
ligaments and cartilage in my knee, and that 
ended my football career. 

But I did go on with track, and was 
fortunate to have been competitive. For many 
years my time of ten seconds in the hundred- 



Childhood through College Years 


9 


yard dash, twenty-three seconds in the 220- 
yard dash, and twenty-two feet in the broad 
jump were records in the conference. I ended 
up going to Bradley on a track and academic 
scholarship and I ran track at Bradley for four 
years. 

Athletics were a very important part 
of my life and I think competitive sports 
helped develop my character a lot. Coach 
Bill Adams, our football coach, was another 
very influential person in my life. I remember 
I broke my toe in one of the football games. 
I really wanted to go back into the game. I 
pleaded with him to let me have a painkiller 
but he wouldn’t do it. It disappointed me at the 
time. But, as I look back on it, it was really a 
marvelous thing that he did, not to jeopardize 
my health for the sake of a football game. 
And I don’t know if every coach would do 
that today. I would hope they would. He was 
thinking about my welfare, although at the 
time, I didn’t see it that way. But he certainly 
was. He became the athletic director and they 
named the football field after him. I just think 
he was a marvelous role model for all of the 
students that were involved in athletics at the 
school. 

What was it about him that was influential 
to you? 

Winning wasn’t everything to him. He 
wanted us to do the very best that we could. As 
long as he felt that we were doing the best we 
could, he was very complimentary of what we 
did. If he thought that we were not performing 
to our ability, he had a way of prodding us 
on to do better. But I don’t remember him 
ever having harsh words for us. He was very 
skillful at being able to get the very best out of 
us without demanding that we excel. I really 
saw that as his great strength. He had a gentle 
approach to the game, and yet you knew that 


he desired to win as much as anybody. But if 
he knew that you were doing the best that you 
could, regardless of whether you won or lost, 
he was very supportive of what you did. 

My grandmother Brown used to have a 
plaque in one of her rooms that said, “When 
the Great Maker finally comes, it matters not 
whether you won or lost, but how you played 
the game.” And I think he epitomized that. 
I’ve always felt that was important. With 
our children, Mary Ann and I tried to stress 
that over the years. If you aren’t having fun 
at what you’re doing, then you shouldn’t be 
doing it, whether it’s sports or judging or 
being part of a legal community. Whatever 
you are doing in life you need to enjoy it and 
do it as well as you can. He instilled that in 
all of us and I think that was a very good 
character builder. 

Between elementary school and ROVA High 
School, was there an intermediate school? 

There was, and it was in Altona, Illinois. 
We didn’t call it the middle school; we called 
it junior high. That was the seventh and eighth 
grades, so we were there for two years. We had 
to take the bus because it was about six miles 
from Oneida. 

Was that a transition for you between sixth 
and seventh grade, going from elementary to 
the junior high? 

It was, because you rotated classes. I’ll 
never forget that when I got to junior high, 
there was a study hall area and I thought it 
would be nice to place my initials on one of 
the tables there. The principal, Mr. Pyle, saw 
me doing that. He gave me a bucket of water 
and some soap, and had me clean those tables 
and keep those tables nicely cleaned in the 
study area for several days. That taught me 



10 


Howard D. McKibben 


a valuable lesson that when you come into a 
new place like that, there are other ways to 
make your mark than by writing your initials 
on a table, [laughter] 

I guess there’s other ways to make your mark. 

I discovered that, [laughs] I enjoyed 
basketball a great deal too. One of the special 
moments that I had playing basketball was 
when we played Galesburg. They were in 
a different league than ours. They were a 
much larger school. Two of their players, the 
Kimbro twins were outstanding football and 
basketball players. They went on to achieve 
some fame as college football players. And I’ll 
never forget, I got fouled a number of times 
during that game. I think I ended up making 
twenty-three free throws in a row, which was 
a record at the time. Now I would be happy 
to make two free throws in a row. 

Yes, that’s interesting. Let me ask you a little bit 
about your friends. 

Most of my friends lived on farms. Steve 
Cox, probably, who was the quarterback of 
our football team, and I were probably the 
closest of friends. His father had passed away 
and so he was pretty much responsible for 
running the farm along with his mother and 
his sister. So I became quite close to Steve. 
He ended up going to Knox College and then 
ultimately I think he went to Colorado State 
and was involved in, I think, nuclear physics. 
He was just a wonderful person. 

Jim Nelson was another schoolmate of 
mine that I liked a great deal. He lived in the 
Altona area. I’ve stayed in touch with him 
since and saw him back at the reunion. 

Steve Cox’s wife Phyllis was the daughter 
of the principal at our school. She was a very 


good friend. And, of course, we knew her 
family well. 

Dale Fhanstrom was another classmate. 
He was very artistically inclined and has since 
gone on to teach design and he has his own 
studio and business. 

As a matter of fact, it was Dale Fhanstrom 
who introduced me to a job between my 
junior and senior year, when I started 
working for a contractor. I had most of the 
jobs that involved brickwork. Dale did a lot 
of the design work on the homes. He was 
very, very talented. Dale and I became good 
friends and I worked with him for, I think, 
three summers with contractor Willard 
King. Willard built custom homes and was 
considered to be one of the finest builders 
in the area. I learned a great deal about 
construction through him. 

Working construction must have been pretty 
good money. 

It was. That was when I moved from 
the dollar to two dollars an hour up to the 
four and five dollar range, which was just 
wonderful for me. I had never earned money 
like that and it started doubling the income 
that I had, and I really appreciated it and 
started saving money for college. 

You and Steve Cox and your other friends, 
I suppose, did things like water-skiing. You 
mentioned that earlier. 

We did. 

You liked to go to the movies. 

We’d go golfing. 

Golfing. Where did you go? 



Childhood through College Years 


11 


We went to a place called Bunker Links in 
Galesburg. It was an eighteen-hole course, a 
really nice course. It’s still there. Lots of times 
we’d try to get up there early in the morning 
on Sundays. We’d get there probably at five- 
thirty or six o’clock, when the dew was still on 
the ground. The morning is a wonderful time 
to golf and we enjoyed those times together. 

Did anybody teach you how to play golf? 

No, we were self-taught and actually 
played a pretty good round of golf. We got to 
the point where we could shoot in the high 
seventies or low eighties, and so it was fun. But 
I never did have a lesson. I continued to play 
golf for a number of years until we had our 
children, and then we started playing tennis, 
and our children became good tennis players. 
It took less time to play tennis and we could 
have more time together as a family. 

It really sounds idyllic growing up in this part 

Well, and what made it so wonderful for 
me were my mother and father, and I think 
part of it may have been because they were 
a little bit older. They were in their forties, 
late forties, when they adopted us. They gave 
us so much guidance and so much love and 
affection. I consider myself to have been the 
luckiest person in the world to have had two 
people who were as loving and affectionate 
and giving as were our parents. I’ve always 
had a very special place in my heart for people 
such as Mother and Father, who wanted to 
take somebody into their home and give them 
a special home. We’ll probably talk later about 
my feelings about adoption and how I’ve been 
involved in adoption matters during the time 
I was a state judge. 


But it’s always been a very special part of 
my life. The guidance that our parents gave 
to my sister and me, and their unconditional 
love changed our lives. They gave us a 
wonderful environment to grow up in. 
When people wonder whether heredity or 
environment is more important in a person’s 
growth and development, I’m certain both 
of them are major contributors to your life 
and any small successes you have in life. 
But, I have to say, in my case, that the major 
contributor was the family and home that 
they provided for us. I will always cherish 
their memories. 

How important was religion to your 
upbringing? 

We were in a community where we 
had Lutherans and Presbyterians and 
Methodists. There were many Lutherans 
in Knox County. Many came over from the 
Scandinavian countries. I was a Methodist 
and my mother and father were Methodists. 
My grandmother Brown was a Methodist. 
We went to church quite regularly. 

Our churches would have social activities, 
and we just loved the bazaars that they held 
and all the good food. We also had organized 
sports teams through the church. We would 
go to other communities and play baseball 
against other church groups. 

I would also go to Sunday school. We had 
a church that had a belfry, and we’d go up into 
the bell tower and help ring the bell. And 
that’s where we had our Sunday school. We 
could look out on the town. And sometimes 
we’d actually ring the bell when we weren’t 
supposed to, when we were having a good 
time. 

I actually gave the sermon a couple times 
at church when I was in high school. They 



12 


Howard D. McKibben 


asked every so often if somebody could give a 
sermon, and I volunteered a couple of times 
and delivered the sermon. It was a long time 
ago but I seem to recall I talked about living 
your life to the fullest and reflecting on how 
important your spiritual life is as you go 
through life’s journey 

There was a fellow named Reverend Moon 
who came to our community and put up a 
tent. That was the first time I’d ever gone to a 
revival meeting. It made a lasting mark on me 
because it was so interesting and he was so full 
of fire and brimstone. It was just fascinating. 

We also had little carnivals that would 
come to town. They’d set up their tents and 
Ferris wheels and merry-go-rounds. That was 
a lot of fun because you needed something 
like that for excitement in the small towns. 
They’d do that probably once a year in our 
area. And then on Saturday nights in the park 
that we had, they’d put a big sheet up and they 
would show movies out in the park. 

Across from the park, we had a ball 
diamond. I’ll never forget, when I was in 
high school—I think I was a sophomore—we 
went to Wrigley Field in Chicago and went 
to a baseball game. The Cubs were playing 
the Giants. Willie Mays hit a foul ball and I 
caught it, and he autographed it for me. I kept 
that for some time. Then one day, we ran out 
of baseballs, and so I volunteered to use that 
baseball in a game. They hadn’t mowed the 
grass way out in the outfield, and I lost the 
ball. 

To this day, I’m sure it’s on somebody’s 
mantle someplace, because somebody 
probably found it. I searched for days and 
never could find that ball. That taught me a 
very valuable lesson about things that you 
get that you consider to be valuable. Hold 
onto them and don’t do something foolish, 
[laughs] 


Right, right. 

You know, it’s really funny on this, because 
it just jogs my memory about things that I 
wouldn’t sit and write down or think about. 
You ask one question and then—you’re a 
master at this, [laughs] 

I’m not so sure about that. I just ask the 
questions. It’s your memories. 

It’s funny how they come back. 

Just as an aside, I think we remember things 
by association. 

We do, yes. 

It’s a major way we remember things, so one 
thing can trigger another. 

Right. And I will say one other thing 
about my sister, Marian. They didn’t have 
organized sports for girls in the high schools, 
and that was unfortunate because she would 
have been a great athlete. She had every bit 
as much athletic ability as I did, and I always 
felt sorry that they didn’t have something 
that would have allowed her to have achieved 
her potential. One of the privileges we had 
with my dad being the superintendent 
was that we could go over and get into the 
gymnasium and shoot baskets. I guess maybe 
that’s where I learned to shoot all those free 
throws. But when Marian went to Bradley 
to college, she took second in the National 
Women’s Intercollegiate Billiards. So she 
found something that she could do that wasn’t 
an organized sport. 

That’s very interesting. Did you date in high 
school? 



Childhood through College Years 


13 


I did. I dated several girls in high school 
and one in particular. But after I left for college 
we went our separate ways. 

Were you active in student politics? 

I was. I was president of the National 
Honor Society at ROVA High School and I 
was on the student council. 

You, earlier, told me that you went to Bradley 
University on a track scholarship. 

I did. 

Let me ask you this. Can you say when it 
became clear to you that you wanted to go to 
college or was it always assumed ? 

I would say that it was probably always 
assumed that if my sister and I had the 
academic ability to go to college, that we 
would go to college. And I know my parents 
always were certain that they would do 
everything they could to see that we received 
an education, including going to college and 
whatever else we wanted to do. So there never 
was really any question in my mind that as 
long as I could do it academically, that I’d go 
to college somewhere. 

The issue really was where I would go. 
I had given consideration to a number of 
schools, including the University of Illinois 
and Northwestern, and even Chicago, where 
my father had gone. I have to say the decision 
on going to college was probably driven, in 
large part, by the fact that I received a full 
scholarship at Bradley and it included track, 
where I knew that I’d be able to compete. It 
turned out to be a really good decision on my 
part. But, at the time, I just felt comfortable 
with it because it was fairly close to my 


community, an hour-and-a-half drive, and 
I knew that it was a school of about four 
thousand, that I’d feel comfortable with. 
Those were some of the factors, I guess, that 
caused me to decide to go there. 

I recall that late in my junior year and 
early in my senior year, I was trying to 
decide on colleges and I seriously considered 
Knox College, which was in Galesburg, a 
very fine private school that my mother had 
attended for a year or so. I also considered 
the University of Illinois and Bradley, which 
was located in Peoria. 

There were some scouts from the 
University of Illinois that came to our first 
football game my senior year and they were 
looking to possibly recruit our quarterback 
and myself. Our quarterback got hit on about 
the fourth or fifth play and got a concussion. 
That was his third concussion, and that 
kind of eliminated his prospects of going to 
a major school and playing football. I tore 
ligaments in my right knee on about the 
fifth play after scoring a touchdown, and 
that ended my hopes of playing football in 
college. 

I received an invitation from Jake Schoof 
who was the track coach at Bradley, and 
because of my efforts on the track team at 
ROVA and some of the records that were set 
during my junior and senior year, he offered 
me a scholarship at Bradley, which was a full 
ride, half academic and half athletic. And 
even though I tore the ligaments and tore 
another leg muscle later in the year, to his 
credit, he maintained that scholarship for me 
and was very kind about it. When I called him 
and told him the physical problems that I was 
having, he said, “Well, that scholarship’s good 
for you.” I’ll always be eternally grateful to 
him for that, because that helped me a great 
deal financially to be able to go to college. 



14 


Howard D. McKibben 


So that ultimately is, I think, one of the 
major reasons I selected Bradley. It was 
relatively close to our home and had a good 
journalism department, and that’s what I was 
looking at, was speech and journalism at the 
time. That’s why I decided to go to Bradley. 

Did you ever recover sufficiently so that you 
could compete? 

I did. Then I was on the track team for 
four years at Bradley and broad-jumped and 
ran the hundred and some of the relays. So I 
was able to compete in the Missouri Valley 
Conference during that period of time. In fact, 
at one point—I think it was my sophomore 
year—up at the University of Chicago there 
was in indoor track meet and Ira Murchison 
was in the meet. He had set the world record in 
the hundred meters several years before that. 
I think 10.1, at the time, was the world record. 
I still have the number that I wore during that 
competition and I have his autograph on that. 
He autographed it with his name and his time 
for the record. 

Quite frankly, even though this is getting 
ahead a little bit, that’s one reason I decided that 
I was probably going to go on to law school or 
into public administration. Up until that point, 
I thought maybe I had some hope to consider 
the Olympics. But after running and watching 
Ira Murchison in that track meet, and his time 
was so much faster than mine, I knew there 
wasn’t much hope to be a world competitor 
on the track scene and decided I better do 
something else. That was a very important 
lesson for me, a humbling lesson, I’d say. 

College has a way of doing that, it seems to me, 
because when you go to college and you’re a good 
student or athlete, or both, in your high school, 
you get to college and you are there with other 
outstanding scholars and athletes. 


It’s a humbling experience, and you’re very 
nervous those first few days just acclimating. 
You don’t know a lot of the people there. 
Frankly, I knew very few. No one from my 
school went to Bradley, so it was a period of 
adjustment. 

This must have been a big change for you. 

It was. Like with everybody, when you 
go away from home for the first time and 
you’ve led a fairly sheltered life, it was a fairly 
substantial change. But I felt I adjusted quickly 
and I felt very comfortable there. 

I was fortunate because I lived in a 
dormitory for the first six months and I 
became friends with the head of the dormitory 
system, a man named Dick Wagner, and he 
was a great mentor for me. He ultimately 
became president of the student body at 
Bradley and he was head of the Independent 
Party. There were two political parties at the 
school: the Greek Party representing the 
fraternities, and the Independents. I became 
a dormitory assistant that first six-month 
period and worked with Dick Wagner. He 
sparked my interest in student government 
and, ultimately, my junior year, I was elected 
president of the student body at Bradley. 

Were you elected on the Greek ticket or the 
Independent ticket? 

No one ran against me. I filed as a Greek, but 
I had so many friends with the Independents 
as a result of my contact with them during my 
freshman year, that it was one of the few times 
that an election was uncontested. 

So you must have pledged early on. 

I pledged the end of my first semester and 
then became a member of Theta Chi fraternity. 



Childhood through College Years 


15 


I lived in the Theta Chi house for six months, 
and after that, two of my fraternity brothers 
and I moved into separate housing. Actually, it 
was a room above a bakery on one of the main 
streets in Peoria. It was very fortunate for us 
because the bakery was closed on Mondays. 
We became good friends with the people that 
worked in the bakery on Sundays. When they 
were getting ready to close on Sunday, wed go 
down to the bakery and we could get enough 
rolls and coffee cakes to last us for a whole 
week. It was a wonderful relationship and it 
didn’t cost us much of anything at all. 

That’s great. That’s great. It must have been 
tempting during the week, though, when those 
smells are coming up from below. 

It really was, and we had a refrigerator 
in that apartment where we kept the baked 
goods. I learned what the UCC, Uniform 
Commercial Code, was all about early because 
we bought the refrigerator and they sold it to 
us “as is.” And within a week after we got it, 
it broke down, and we realized when we took 
it back that “as is” meant that we couldn’t do 
much about it. But we were partly responsible 
for it, I think, because we were trying to defrost 
it and it wasn’t a self-defrosting refrigerator. 
My roommate used a blowtorch to try to 
defrost it, and that was not a very good idea. 
We had some good times. 

“As is” became “as was.” 

Right. 

Who were your roommates at this time? 

A1 Edens and Stan Korista. A1 happens 
to live in Reno now. He relocated to Reno a 
number of years ago and we’ve remained good 
friends. And Stan Korista lives in Illinois. They 


were both in the engineering department, 
and I was taking journalism and speech and 
psychology and political science courses. 

So did you also work on the student newspaper 
as a journalism major? 

I didn’t. My sister was at Bradley and 
she was involved in the student newspaper 
and the literary club. I was involved with, 
principally, student government and the 
debate team, as well as track. 

Was the debate team intercollegiate? 

It was. In fact, one of the most memorable 
moments was when my partner and I debated, 
I believe it was at Northwestern, and we got 
into the finals against Harvard. It was a flip- 
flop tournament, and you didn’t know what 
side of the issue you are going to have until just 
before the debate. My partner was a wonderful 
researcher and I relied heavily on her research, 
and she relied heavily on my gift of gab—or 
whatever gift I had of being able to express 
myself. We ended up losing the tournament 
to Harvard, but by only one point, so we were 
very, very happy about that and thought it 
was a very successful year. I learned a great 
deal from debate. I also was on Glee Club and 
we got a chance to travel around singing and 
representing the university, and we enjoyed 
that a great deal too. 

Was that the first time you’d done much 
traveling outside of Illinois? 

It really was. In those days, we didn’t have 
the transportation, obviously, that we have 
now, and other than one trip my family and I 
took in 1952 to the San Francisco area, I think 
the farthest I’d gone was Chicago to a couple 
of baseball games. So the chance on the track 



16 


Howard D. McKibben 


team or the Glee Club to travel around was a 
nice experience for me. 

On the track team, I formed some 
friendships with a fellow named Sam Pendola, 
who was really a fine sprinter, and Paul Moore, 
who was a wonderful hurdler, and we always 
had good times when we traveled. Usually, 
the traveling was either by bus or by train. We 
were in the Missouri Valley Conference. 

We had wonderful basketball teams 
at Bradley during that period. They were 
nationally ranked. While I was there, we had 
Chet Walker, who ultimately played with the 
Philadelphia 76ers, and Bobby Joe Mason, 
who played for the Harlem Globetrotters, 
and Mack Herndon, and several others. 

Chuck Osborne was the coach. As 
members of the track team, we were ushers 
at all the basketball games. I watched 
Oscar Robertson when he was playing for 
Cincinnati and Elgin Baylor who was playing 
for Seattle. We saw many great players play 
basketball there. 

We had wonderful seats because we 
could sit right up in the rafters and look right 
down on the floor, and it was free. I ended 
up tutoring Bobby Joe Mason in English to 
try to help out. That was one thing I did to 
help some of the other student athletes at the 
university. 

That’s pretty interesting. Speaking of tutoring 
and teaching, are there any teachers from this 
time at the university that stand out in your 
mind? 

We had a political science professor who 
really stimulated our interest in philosophy. 
I took several courses in philosophy and 
he made us think a great deal outside the 
envelope. I found that he was a very, very 
interesting professor. Another interesting 
teacher in psychology was a Professor Smith. 


He was absolutely brilliant. His classes were 
large because everybody enjoyed taking 
his courses. But it was fascinating listening 
to him. Probably the third person was a 
Nicholas Nirodi [phonetic], and I’ll get the 
spelling for you out of our yearbook here. He 
was a former, I think, Minister of Finance in 
Hungary. He taught one of our economics 
classes. He was an outstanding instructor. 
I’d say the three of them had some influence 
on my thought process and stimulated my 
interest in political science and the field of 
law. 

Tell me a little hit about that, about how you 
came to decide that maybe journalism wasn’t 
the way for you to go. 

It was a slow process. As I got involved 
in student government at Bradley, I found I 
really enjoyed that a lot. I enjoyed working 
with other people. We developed, during 
the time I was involved as vice president 
and then president of the student body, a 
lecture arts program. At Bradley, students 
were required to attend lecture arts programs 
and most students didn’t want to go because 
they weren’t very interesting. When I became 
vice president of the student body, I decided 
that we’d change the lecture arts programs. 
We started charging the students a little more 
money for the programs, but then we invited 
world-renowned figures to participate. 

I’ll never forget when we invited Wernher 
von Braun. We had dinner with him the 
evening that he lectured. It was just a 
wonderful experience to meet him. He was 
such a dynamic person and had done so 
much in the field of space exploration and the 
development of the Saturn rocket. It was one 
of the highlights of my college life. We also 
invited Marlin Perkins, of Mutual of Omaha’s 
Wild Kingdom, who was the head of the St. 



Childhood through College Years 


17 


Louis Zoo. He spoke of his quest to find the 
abominable snowman. We had Victor Riesel, 
who had been blinded when acid was thrown 
in his face. He was an American newspaper 
journalist who specialized in news relating 
to labor unions. The FBI arrested eight men 
and said the attack was the work of garment 
district terrorists in New York who had tried 
to silence Mr. Riesel. And we had Sherman 
Adams. He was chief of staff for President 
Eisenhower and was involved in the vicuna 
coat incident. 

So we were able to assemble a cast of 
really fine people to come to Bradley and 
lecture, and the students just flocked to these 
lectures. It was a wonderful experience for 
everyone. Being involved in student politics 
convinced me that I wanted to do something 
in the area of public administration, the 
public sector, and I thought, in terms of a 
career in politics or law. 

That’s interesting, especially getting the chance 
to meet these notable individuals, but then 
also your orientation towards public service. 

Right. I don’t know. I’ve always had an 
interest in public service, and I think part 
of it is that I felt I was very fortunate early 
in my life to get a second lease on life when 
I was adopted. I’ve always felt somehow 
that perhaps I could give back to society 
what society had given me by giving me 
the opportunity to have a rich and full life 
through the adoption process. And I’m 
absolutely convinced that because society 
supported institutions like The Baby Fold 
that gave me a new lease on life, I felt I got 
truly a new life because of what happened. 
No one really knows why they get involved 
in public service rather than staying in the 
private sector, but I think probably that was 
a major factor. 


The second and most important factor, 
I know, was my parents. They were both 
educators and my dad had devoted his entire 
life to public service in the school systems 
and administration. My mother really was 
totally devoted to education. Even though I 
had thought some about going into teaching 
and perhaps coaching, I knew I wanted to 
be involved, as they were, in public service. 
They instilled that in me and it was a major 
factor in my decision. 

So when you graduate in 1962, what degree 
do you have? 

It was a bachelor’s degree in political 
science. 




2 


Graduate and Law Schools 


And then you get a job in Saginaw, Michigan. 

First I went to the University of Pittsburgh 
Graduate School of Public and International 
Affairs to work on a master’s degree. I was 
fortunate there. They gave me a full scholarship 
that covered all of my room and board and 
tuition. Dick Wagner, whom I have spoken 
about earlier, was there working on his doctor 
of philosophy in education. I decided to pursue 
a master’s degree in public administration or 
public affairs. I think Donald Stone was head 
of GSPIA, which is the Graduate School of 
Public and International Affairs, at the time, 
and it was a relatively new school. 

I couldn’t afford, in those days, to go to ball 
games, so I would go up in the Cathedral of 
Learning, which was the highest building on 
the Pittsburg campus. I’d go up to one of the 
top floors and take my radio and binoculars, 
and I’d watch the baseball games and the 
football games when they were played at 
Forbes Field. And that was how I entertained 
myself on the weekends, [laughs] 


I see. So could you get a pretty good view of 
Forbes Field? 

I got a good view. The problem was 
you couldn’t see home plate. As a matter of 
fact, I don’t have it here, it’s at home, but I 
have a picture of the students watching the 
World Series when the series was played in 
Pittsburgh. They were watching the game 
from the Cathedral of Learning, very close 
to where I used to sit and watch the games. 
That was on the front of, I think, one of the 
Life magazines. 

Oh, how interesting. Now, were these the 
Clemente years in Pittsburgh or is this a little 
early for that? 

Yes—the Clemente years. 

But this is the Bill Mazeroski teams. 

Right, exactly. Right. Yes, that would have 
been in 1963? 



20 


Howard D. McKibben 


It was about 1963, 1964. 

Mazeroski hit his famous home run to 
win the World Series for Pittsburgh in 1960. 
I spent a year in Pittsburgh. The requirement 
of the school was that you spend a year 
working out in the field. At that time, I still 
was very interested in going to law school, 
but I was also interested in working in city 
management. So I went to Saginaw, Michigan, 
for my internship, and I was assistant to the 
city manager. His name was Ed Potthoff. He 
was considered to be one of the outstanding 
city managers in the country, and it was a fine 
experience for me to get to work under him 
in Saginaw. 

During the year that I spent in Saginaw, 
Michigan, we were working on what’s called 
program performance budgeting, which 
was a relatively new concept. The existing 
budget was a line-item type of budget. We 
were developing a fairly unique program 
at the time in city management, which was 
to develop your budget around programs 
and performance levels. We would identify 
the important programs and then allocate 
monies to those programs. When it was taken 
to the city council, the council could think 
more in terms of programs, and not pencils 
and paper and the small items. They were 
thinking more globally then and trying to 
allocate monies among programs, that way 
you could quantify the performance based 
upon the number of people you had in these 
programs. That was a new development in 
municipal budgeting. 

While I was at Saginaw, it was a very 
interesting year for me because I also worked 
on the newspaper. I worked on the sports 
desk at the newspaper covering basketball 
and football games. I would write some of 
the box scores on the night desk. Then I 
also was a disc jockey and would spin some 


platters on weekends. I enjoyed the Elvis 
Presley songs. 

The other thing I did for recreation during 
that period was golf. I probably played thirty- 
six holes every weekend and played during 
the week. I was single and I had quite a bit 
of time on my hands. I would probably play 
nine holes three times during the course of 
the week and I got down to be about a five 
or six handicap and really enjoyed it a lot. It 
was a wonderful opportunity to play a lot of 
courses in that area. 

That’s great. 

That was an exciting year for me. [laughs] 
It sounds like a busy year, too. 

It was. I also got quite involved with the 
city attorney there, and that probably was 
the final catalyst to convince me to go to law 
school. I really enjoyed working with the 
city attorney. The assistant city attorney had 
lost his sight, and I just marveled at the way 
he could, nevertheless, handle the duties as 
assistant city attorney, even though he had 
that disadvantage. I developed a wonderful 
relationship with the people in the city 
attorney’s office and enjoyed that a great deal. 

I also spent some time with the personnel 
director because I was designated as the 
person responsible for selecting all of the men 
and women that would be lifeguards. It was 
enjoyable to interview all the applicants for 
those positions, [laughter] So it was a very 
fun year that I had. 

Had Lefty Frizzell’s song come out by this time 
on Saginaw, Michigan? 

I don’t remember that now, but I do know 
about that song, yes. 



Graduate and Law Schools 


21 


I think it’s a little before this time. That’s really 
interesting, and involved in lots of activities. 
Was this a paid internship? 

It was. I didn’t receive a lot, but I received 
enough to pay for my room and board. I 
stayed at the YMCA about six months and 
then I lived in a condominium for the other 
six months while I was there. 

And it was during that period of time that 
John Kennedy was assassinated, and I’ll never 
forget it. I had just come into the YMCA. I 
was out in the lobby area where they had a 
television, and everybody said, “You have to 
come over here. There’s been a huge tragedy,” 
and I went over and watched the television 
and we all stood there in shock. I’ll never 
forget that. 

That just consumed the whole nation for four 
or five days. 

It did, yes. Then, as a result of my contact 
with the city attorney’s office there in Saginaw, 
I decided to apply to the University of 
Michigan law school and I was admitted to the 
University of Michigan upon my graduation 
from Pittsburgh. 

So you enter University of Michigan law school 
in the fall of 1964? 

That would have been the fall of 1964, 
right. 

How did law school compare to the master’s 
program in public administration? 

It was a sea change, really. It was a 
cultural change for me and certainly a change 
academically because of the Socratic method 
that is used in law school. I wasn’t quite used 
to that type of thought process and so there 


was an adjustment period. That first year, I 
lived in the Law Quad. As a matter of fact, 
that’s a picture of it up there, [pointing to the 
wall] That picture was taken exactly where 
my room was located. I would look across 
the quad, and to the left is the library and 
straight across is where the dining commons 
was. I worked as a waiter there, helping to pay 
for my room and board. I spent my first year 
there in the Law Quad and I roomed with 
Bill Pelster and Jim Cooke. Bill Pelster just 
retired as a senior partner at Skadden, Arps 
in New York. Jim Cooke was in a small firm in 
Washington, D.C., and he’s just getting ready 
to retire too. But we’ve maintained a close 
relationship over the years. And Joe Ballway 
was a third roommate of ours. He worked 
for a number of years as legal counsel with 
Shell Oil Company, and we have maintained 
a relationship over the years. 

My first semester, I roomed with Frank 
Struther. I think he may have had one of the 
highest entrance exams in the history of the 
University of Michigan law school. He loved 
horse racing and he would read the racing 
forms more than his text books, and yet he’d 
go in and get scores as high or higher than 
anybody else in the law school because he had 
that type of mind where he could assimilate 
everything very quickly. 

He had a horse named D’Iberville. Matter 
of fact, he had two or three racehorses. He 
told me all about D’Iberville, and he said, 
“D’Iberville’s going to win the race at the 
Detroit Race Track as long as it gets out of 
the gate.” I figured, well, the horse is definitely 
going to get out of the gate, so why don’t we 
go to the race and I will bet on him. 

We went to the racetrack. The starter said, 
“They’re off.” And then the starter announced, 
“One of the horses is not out of the gate.” 
Of course, that was D’Iberville, and I lost 
my two dollars. Frank immediately shipped 



22 


Howard D. McKibben 


D’Iberville down to Kentucky for further 
training. 

That was my second experience on losing 
a bet, on a race. 

My first experience, actually, on losing a bet 
was when we were traveling to Wichita, Kansas, 
for the track meet I was telling you about, the 
Missouri Valley Conference, and there was a 
little poker game going on, on the train, just a 
friendly one, with some of the players. I didn’t 
have enough to cover the pot, so I put the only 
sport coat I had in the pot. The game was high/ 
low/in-between. I had an ace and a deuce and I 
thought I couldn’t lose. As luck would have it, 
the next card was an ace and I lost, and Sammy 
Pendola, who was one of our track teammates 
ended up with my sport coat. It took me a long 
time to get enough money to pay him back and 
get my sport coat back. 

[laughter] Those were very valuable 
lessons. I don’t gamble anymore. 

Those are great stories. While you’re at law 
school and you have these roommates, were they 
also study partners? Or how did you study? Did 
you study on your own? 

We studied individually. We’d talk about 
cases from time to time, but it was more 
individual study. 

I would go back for summers to Illinois and 
I think I worked one year with the Agricultural 
Stabilization Conservation Service, and 
another summer I may have continued work 
on construction of houses to make money 
for law school. So that’s what I did during my 
summer vacations. I also, to supplement my 
income, did some substitute teaching, usually 
high school and psychology courses and what 
have you in Royal Oak and places close to Ann 
Arbor. 

And of course, one of the wonderful 
things at Ann Arbor were the football games. 


We just couldn’t wait for the fall to come 
around so that we could go to the football 
games. When you’re there with over 100,000 
fans in what we called the Big House, it was 
quite an experience. I’ll never forget. The first 
year I was there, Lou Alcindor aka Kareem- 
Abdul-Jabbar, was looking to go to college 
someplace, and he was being courted by 
the University of Michigan and UCLA and 
some others. We all remember when he came 
on campus, and he was quite a figure there. 
We were hoping he was going to end up at 
Michigan, but he decided to go to UCLA and 
the rest is history. 

But Cazzie Russell played at Michigan 
while I was there. We had some good 
basketball teams, and we had good football 
teams, obviously, during that period too. 

Ann Arbor, the whole town, shuts down for 
football. 

Oh, it really does. I mean it really does. 
Just amazing. 

It’s an event, [laughs] It really is. 

Were there particular subjects that you enjoyed 
in law school or that you excelled at? 

I enjoyed constitutional law, criminal 
procedure, criminal law. I would say those are 
the subjects that I enjoyed the most, and those 
were in line with my inclination to work in 
the area of public service, being a prosecutor 
someday, going into the public sector. Those 
were all pretty compatible with my thought 
process. 

I’ll never forget the first day in our 
criminal law class. We were all seated in there 
waiting for the professor to come in, and all of 
a sudden, somebody broke into the classroom 



Graduate and Law Schools 


23 


chasing somebody else and then there was a 
shot fired. There was blood all over the place. 
We were all just sitting there, stunned. Then 
a few minutes later, the professor came in 
and said, “Now I want you all to sit there 
and write and explain exactly what you saw 
happened here.” We all tried to explain what 
we had seen. Our responses were all over the 
compass, from the assailant being a woman, 
being a man, Hispanic, African American, 
white. It was a very, very poignant lesson to 
us that eyewitness identification in stressful 
situations is not very reliable. I’ve never 
forgotten that. But that’s how he started 
that class. It hadn’t happened in any classes 
before because I think he was a relatively 
new professor and we had no idea this was 
going to happen. It was a startling event. I had 
suspicions that it had been staged, but I wasn’t 
sure. It was very realistic and they did a good 
job. Apparently, they had hired some special 
actors and they’d equipped them with real 
blood that would explode somehow in a little 
packet that they had. It was very realistic. But 
I definitely remember that. 

How dramatic. That’s a great teaching device. 

At first, I also remember sitting in those 
lecture halls hoping that they wouldn’t call on 
me to debate and discuss some of the cases. 
There were a few in our class that liked to 
discuss things all the time, but the rest of us 
really were very comfortable letting others 
discuss the cases. 

Was this the time in the first class the professor 
would say, “Look to your left, look to your right 
and. . 

I believe that they did say that, as a matter 
of fact. “One of you will not be here,” or 
maybe, “Two of you will not be here.” I forget. 


But it was nerve-wracking. You hoped that 
things would work out all right for you. 

Then after my first year, I returned, and it 
was the fall of my second year that I went to a 
mixer that was being held by the law school. 
It was just off the Law Quad. As it turned out, 
this was the most wonderful evening of my 
life. I noticed this young lady who was there, 
and I thought I’d ask her to dance. As I walked 
over to ask her to dance, someone else from 
our law school asked her, and I was hoping 
that wasn’t the end of it. But as soon as that 
music finished, she immediately walked over 
to where I was, and I then asked her to dance. 
She was beautiful and kind and very engaging 
and I didn’t want the music to stop. 

I escorted her back to the house where 
she and some friends of hers were living. She 
offered me some coffee. She said, “Do you like 
coffee?” 

I said, “Yes.” Well, I didn’t care for coffee at 
all. I think that was the only cup of coffee I’ve 
ever had in my life, but I was very interested 
in her and I had the impression she might 
be interested in me. We talked for hours that 
evening and I knew at that point she was the 
person I’d like to spend the rest of my life with. 
Her name was Mary Ann Scott. 

She and I dated during that second year of 
law school and we were married the following 
July. In my case, it was love at first sight, 
which you hear about, but you don’t think 
necessarily it’s going to happen to you. But it 
did in my case, so I was very fortunate. She is 
the most wonderful person I have ever known 
and we were married July 2, 1966, in the 
Brown City Methodist Church in Michigan. 
Mary Ann is the love of my life and my best 
friend. 

That’s wonderful. 

And then it was that.... 



24 


Howard D. McKibben 


Pardon me. What was her maiden name? 

Mary Ann Scott. She was born in Ohio in 
a little town around Lima, Ohio, and then her 
family moved to Brown City, Michigan, and 
she attended Michigan State undergraduate 
school. She was doing graduate work at the 
University of Michigan in the library science 
program, receiving her masters degree. We 
did a lot of studying together after that. Wed 
go over to the Rackham Hall. Rackham was a 
famous illustrator of children’s books. It was 
actually more quiet than it was on the Law 
Quad, so wed do quite a bit of the studying 
over there, to the extent we studied. We were 
very much in love and it was a nice journey. 

I had visited Nevada the summer before 
because my sister Marian was teaching school 
in Carson City. 

Now, this is interesting. Your sister graduates 
from Bradley. 

Right. 

And how does she make her way to Carson 
City? 

She married a young man who was a son 
of professors at Bradley, and they just decided 
to come out west. They liked the Sierra 
Nevadas and she got a job teaching school in 
Carson City. 

I visited her the summer of 1965, just to 
see the area because she had told me how 
beautiful it was, and I, frankly, fell in love 
with Lake Tahoe and the Carson Valley area, 
which is south of Carson City. I vowed at that 
point that if things worked out, I probably 
would want to head west too. I’d always had 
a desire to go west, but I didn’t know exactly 
where. I probably was thinking in terms of 
California, but when I saw this particular 


area with the Sierra Nevadas, I fell in love 
with the scenic beauty of the area, and she 
told me how warm and nice the people were 
in northern Nevada. 

One of my sister’s students was the 
daughter of Paul Laxalt, who was then 
the lieutenant governor. I called his office 
and asked if I could come in to discuss job 
opportunities. I went over to his office in 
Carson City and I spent probably at least an 
hour, or maybe an hour and a half, talking 
with the lieutenant governor Paul Laxalt. 
That was one of the wonderful things about 
Nevada. You could actually meet your public 
officials and they were willing to take time to 
talk with you. 

When I left the office, he said, “We don’t 
have any openings in our office at this time, 
but if you’re still interested, I’ll get in touch 
with you if I can find somebody that would 
be interested in taking you into the practice.” 
I received a letter from him about five months 
later and he said, “There’s a lawyer in the 
Carson Valley named George Abbott, who 
was Undersecretary of the Interior under 
President Eisenhower, and he said he would 
be happy to hire you as an extern for the 
summer if you want to come out for the 
summer.” Sight unseen, I agreed to do that, 
and George and I talked over the telephone. 

I came out that summer before I got 
married, and worked with George Abbott 
then, assisting him in his law firm the early 
part of the summer. 

I went back to get married on July 2nd. 
My brother-in-law and I drove back and we 
were starting out two days ahead of time, so 
we were cutting it fairly close. The generator 
on our car went out in Wendover, Nevada. 
I didn’t have a lot of money to get an airline 
ticket, although that would have been the last 
recourse. I couldn’t get the car repaired in 
Wendover until two or three days later. 



Graduate and Law Schools 


25 


We were able to convince some people 
that had a motor home to let us follow them 
across the salt flats to Salt Lake City. I didn’t 
have any lights on the car, and we followed 
them all the way across the salt flats into Salt 
Lake City that evening. And then when they 
opened up the service department there they 
fixed the generator, and I arrived in Brown 
City just in time for the wedding. 

My goodness. 

That was a harrowing experience getting 
back there. I think Mary Ann was a little 
nervous about it, but that was a very interesting 
journey. 




3 


Nevada: A New Lawyer and 
District Attorney 


Then Mary Ann and I came out after we 
got married. It was our honeymoon to travel 
to Nevada and see if we liked it well enough to 
stay And of course, we went to San Francisco 
and Yosemite and all of the beautiful areas in 
the Sierra Nevadas. We liked it well enough 
that we decided wed probably come back to 
the Tahoe area after I graduated the next year. 

So you have another year... 

I went back and completed my final year 
at the Michigan Law School. 

at Ann Arbor. 

And Mary Ann got her master’s in library 
science. Immediately after we graduated, we 
moved out here and I took a job with George 
Abbott. 

Where was his practice? 

It was in Minden, which is located in 
a beautiful valley at the base of the Sierra 


Nevada mountains. George did a lot of work 
for the ranchers, including land matters and 
trusts and estates. He was heavily involved in 
the political scene. He was chairman of the 
Republican Party in Nevada at the time and 
he had been quite involved in the national 
scene. I remember he had been one of the 
main campaign advisors for Paul Laxalt when 
he was running for offices. 

We rented an apartment in Carson 
City for two months and then we moved to 
Gardnerville and rented a very small house. It 
had three rooms in it, one central place where 
the heat register was, and that’s where our son 
Mark was born in 1968. 

I was going to take the bar the first year 
I got out here, but I wasn’t permitted to take 
the bar because of the residency requirements. 
I petitioned the supreme court and the state 
bar to allow me to tack those two periods of 
time together, but I wasn’t allowed to do that. 
I did file a lawsuit in the Nevada Supreme 
Court—that’s the only lawsuit I’ve ever filed 
in my life—against the bar, requesting that I 
be given that opportunity. Then Chief Justice 



28 


Howard D. McKibben 


John Collins called me and said, “We have 
your petition and we’re going to deny it. Do 
you want a formal denial, or would you prefer 
to just withdraw your application and we’ll 
refund the money to you for the filing fee?” I 
said that because of our financial position, we 
needed the money Since I couldn’t practice 
for a year anyway, I didn’t need a formal 
opinion. I had the money sent back to me 
and withdrew my petition, and then I waited 
a year to take the bar exam. 

It is somewhat ironic but about three 
years later, I was selected to be a member of 
the Board of Bar Examiners, and I served 
on the Board of Bar Examiners with one of 
my colleagues here, Judge Hagen, before he 
became a judge and certainly before I became 
a federal judge, for probably—I think I was on 
the board for about thirteen years. During that 
time, I advocated for the elimination of the 
residency requirement in Nevada. I felt that if 
a person truly had an intent to make Nevada 
their domicile and residence, they should be 
permitted to take the bar. Ultimately, the U. S. 
Supreme Court eliminated that requirement, 
but it was too late for me. 

So I spent a year working as a law clerk 
for George Abbott and studying for the bar 
exam at the time that my son, Mark Scott 
McKibben, was born in April of 1968. Then 
my daughter, Susan Jennifer Wilson, was born 
in 1969. They’ve been the two best things 
that have ever happened to Mary Ann and to 
me. Parents could not have more wonderful 
children. They’ve been the apple of our eyes 
and a great joy to us all these years. We are 
very proud of them. Susan has a law degree 
and been a staff attorney for the supreme 
court in Nevada, and our son, Mark, has a 
master’s in business and is a Vice President 
of Heritage Bank here in Reno. Mark has two 
children, our grandson Alexander (Alex), and 
a granddaughter, Elizabeth, and Susan has two 


children, our granddaughter, Annabelle, and 
our grandson, Zachary. I have to say having 
grandchildren is absolutely delightful. They 
are very precious and keep us young at heart. 

That’s wonderful. Let me ask you a little bit 
about this time when you’ve come to the 
Carson Valley. Had you ever thought of or did 
you plan to take the Michigan bar? 

I didn’t because I just felt that I was 
going to be situated out in the west, whether 
it was Nevada or California, and even at 
that time, I thought perhaps we’d be going 
to California. The three areas that we were 
really interested in were the Boulder area out 
of Denver, San Diego, and the Tahoe area. I 
really didn’t think that we were going to stay 
in the Midwest. 

So that first year as a clerk for George Abbott, 
what sorts of things were you doing? 

He represented a number of the ranchers 
in the Carson Valley, which is located in 
Douglas County south of Carson City. I’ll 
never forget that one of my assignments was 
to try to see if I could resolve a little dispute 
over one of the irrigation boxes, located on 
one of the ranches. I went out there, and these 
two farmers were there and both of them 
had shotguns. That was something I hadn’t 
learned anything about in law school. It all 
was fairly amicable, but when I saw them out 
there with shotguns, I got a little nervous. At 
least it was a reasonable encounter and the 
dispute got resolved. 

I also attended several board of 
equalization hearings because George was 
doing quite a bit of work on land issues. 
That was my first contact with Bridgeport, 
California. We appeared there before the 
board of equalization representing ranchers 



Nevada: A New Lawyer and District Attorney 


29 


who had large ranching operations in Mono 
County, both sheep and cattle. While we were 
representing them I had a chance to see that 
area of the Sierra Nevadas. We now have a 
little cabin up in the Twin Lakes area out of 
Bridgeport., I had gone up there after the 
Board of Equalization hearings and looked 
at that beautiful area, which is the north rim 
area of Yosemite. It’s gorgeous country . . . 
It’s beautiful. 

and I thoroughly enjoyed the work, 
[laughs] George Abbott was an expert on 
water law, as well as land issues, as a result 
of his work in the Interior Department. 

So at this time, you’re also studying for the 
Nevada bar. 

Right. 

And were you doing that on your own or.... 

I did that strictly on my own. 

You didn’t take a review course? 

I didn’t take a review course. There were 
some old materials that people had that were 
in the library and I just studied those. I was 
successful on the bar. I was a little nervous 
because I had been out of law school for a 
year, but everything worked out well. 

What was the exam like at that time? 

As I recall, we were responsible for about 
twenty-eight subjects. I recall after the first 
morning at noon, we were leaving. We were 
in an elevator, because it was given at the 
old Masonic Hall in downtown Reno, and I 
recall that one of the applicants said, “Boy, 
that was a difficult bulk sales act question.” I 
just looked at him. I wasn’t sure what a bulk 


sale was under the bankruptcy code, and I 
certainly didn’t see any issue about bulk sales 
on the exam. So that made me really nervous. 
Quite frankly, I’ve never seen that person 
since. You just have to do the best you can 
and hope for the best, [laughs] 

How soon after taking the exam did you find 
the results? 

I think the results came out in October, 
and we were admitted then and had the 
ceremony at the supreme court in Carson 
City. After that, I continued to work with 
George Abbott. But shortly after that, I was 
asked by John Chrislaw, who was the district 
attorney in Douglas County, if I would 
accept a position as a deputy in the office. 
Bill Crowell Jr. from Carson City was one of 
his deputies. John asked me to come on as 
the second deputy in the Douglas County 
District Attorney’s Office. I was admitted 
to the bar in 1968 and I became a deputy in 
Douglas County in 1969. 

One of the first cases I handled, as I recall, 
was a case that involved Raymond Love, who 
owned the “Love Chapel” at Lake Tahoe. 
He performed many marriages, and the 
question arose as to whether or not he had 
a congregation and could actually perform 
these marriages. My recollection, although 
it goes back a number of years now, was that 
I was seeking an injunction on behalf of the 
county contending he was performing these 
marriages and wasn’t qualified as a minister 
because he didn’t have a congregation. 

I’ll never forget the morning of the 
hearing, Raymond Love showed up with 
several vans. There were a number of 
people in the vans and they set up chairs 
out in the front of the courthouse, and he 
gave a sermon. I knew I was in trouble with 
my case at that point because this was his 



30 


Howard D. McKibben 


congregation. And I think we dismissed the 
case after that. These are things they didn’t 
teach us at law school, [laughs] 

No, absolutely not. Ann Arbor would have 
absolutely no concept of that sort of thing. 

Right. That’s right. 

Were you active in community affairs at this 
time? 

I was active in Young Republicans. I 
ultimately became chairman of the Nevada 
State Young Republicans. I was also a 
member of Rotary, although I resigned 
from Rotary when I went on the federal 
bench. They didn’t admit women to Rotary 
at the time. In 1970, then I ran for district 
attorney when John Chrislaw retired, and I 
was elected district attorney in 1970. 

What was that like to run for political office? 

Well, I didn’t have an opponent. 

Kind of like running for student body president 
back at Bradley. 

It’s kind of unusual. Even when I was 
district judge, I never had an opponent. 
Mary Ann jokes with me and says it’s because 
nobody else ever wanted those positions. She 
may well be right. But I did remind her that 
after I left the positions the races became 
contested. But I was fortunate nobody did 
file against me. Then I was elected in 1970, 
and I took office in 1971 and was district 
attorney of Douglas County from 1971 until 
1977. I had the good fortune of working with 
two wonderful deputy district attorneys, 
William Crowell, Jr. and Steve McMorris, 


who assisted me greatly during the years I 
was the District Atorney in Douglas County. 

What sorts of cases did the D.A. in Douglas 
County .... 

Probably one of the most significant 
cases I handled was a case involving Kenneth 
Meller. He had robbed banks at Lake Tahoe 
and had kidnapped several people. Before he 
kidnapped the people, he was stopped by Gary 
Gifford, who was a state highway patrolman, 
on Highway 50 at Lake Tahoe. As a result 
of that stop, Officer Gifford was subdued 
by Meller. Meller flipped him over. Officer 
Gifford hit his head on a rock and he was 
unconscious. Meller removed the gun from 
Gifford’s holster and shot and killed him. He 
then took hostages at the north end of Lake 
Tahoe. I ended up prosecuting him for capital 
murder, and he was convicted. 

My recollection is this, that as Meller 
was leaving the courtroom, he looked at me 
and threatened me. Then I got a call from 
the warden several years later indicating that 
Meller had attempted to escape and they 
thought he was coming after me. They shot 
and killed him before he escaped. I always 
pretty much assumed from that, he may have 
been trying to come and find me, because that 
was the comment he made as he was leaving 
the courtroom. That was one of the most 
difficult cases that I had while I was district 
attorney. 

As many as you want to tell me. 

An elderly man, who had a number 
of DUIs, was driving his car. It was in the 
wintertime. He was driving on the highway 
south of Gardnerville, he had gotten up 
on a snow embankment and didn’t know 



Nevada: A New Lawyer and District Attorney 


31 


it. The car was perfectly positioned so that 
the wheels were off the ground and he was 
behind the wheel, and he thought he was still 
driving. The wheels were going around. The 
patrolman came up to his car and knocked 
on the window. He looked out at the officer 
and he passed out because as he said, “How 
could this patrolman be standing there and 
I’m driving this car?” 

I didn’t know what to charge him with, 
because he was in control of a vehicle, but he 
wasn’t actually on the highway. He was up on 
the snow bank, but he was still attempting to 
drive. I found an obscure statute that made 
it a misdemeanor to be intoxicated while 
in control of a vehicle next to the highway. 
He pled guilty to the charge. It was really an 
unusual case. 

That’s funny. That’s a funny one. Are there 
other cases that stand out in your mind from 
this period? 

One thing I did do as a district attorney 
was to codify all the ordinances in Douglas 
County. We eliminated a number of the 
ordinances and we codified others and this 
became the Douglas County code. That was 
the first time they had codified the ordinances 
in Douglas County. 

We did have a number of cases, obviously, 
that involved schemes to defraud the casinos. 
One scheme was to shave the cards. The 
defendants had sandpaper glued under 
their fingernails. One of them played what 
they call the first base and the other played 
third base at the blackjack table. They would 
shave the edges of face cards and aces so that 
when the person at the third base would be 
given the cards to cut that person would see 
where the edge of the card had been shaved 
and then cut the cards so that the next card 


up would be either an ace or a face card; 
that would go to his partner at first base 
and would give him a slight advantage. The 
person on first base, when the person on the 
third base had cut the cards, would increase 
the bet. 

The problem was, they did it too 
dramatically. They would bet very low 
amounts, and the player at third base would 
cut the cards, the other player would increase 
the bet dramatically. The person who would 
cut the cards would make such an effort to get 
down to look to see where the card might be 
shaved that the casino spotters detected the 
scheme fairly quickly. They found the glue 
and other fruits of the crime in their room 
at the hotel. People can be quite creative in 
concocting illegal schemes. 

Juries are unpredictable. 

One of the things I have enjoyed more 
than anything else, are jury trials. I’ve always 
had a great interest in the jury system and the 
excitement and drama of the courtroom. 




4 

The Bench 


Let me ask you this. When did you begin to 
think that you might want to be a judge? 

I had really thought that I might run for 
either attorney general or for Congress. That’s 
what I had in the back of my mind. I wasn’t 
sure if I really wanted to stay in the political 
arena and attend all of the functions you have 
to attend. I was a family person and liked to 
spend as much of my free time as I could with 
my family but I still had an interest in politics. 
I had given that quite a bit of consideration, 
and then Noel Manoukian, who was the 
District Judge in Douglas County, was selected 
by Governor O’Callaghan to take a seat on 
the Nevada Supreme Court. I received a 
telephone call from Governor O’Callaghan 
and he said, “I really would like to have you 
consider accepting an appointment to the 
district bench in Douglas County.” 

I told him I would think about it. I wasn’t 
sure if that’s what I wanted to do and whether 
it was the best career move for our family. 
Mary Ann and I talked about it a great deal, 
and that’s when we decided I should apply for 


the judgeship. I think the primary reason for 
that discussion was the consideration of our 
family, our children, our desire to spend as 
much time as we could together and still be 
involved in public service. 

Governor O’Callaghan used to enjoy 
telling the story that after the Judicial Selection 
Committee submitted the three names for the 
position and I was one on the list, he called 
me and asked me to the governor’s office. 

When I met with the governor he told 
me that he had decided that he would select 
me for the position. I was very pleased and 
honored and as I was getting ready to leave 
he said, “Oh, by the way, you are a Democrat, 
aren’t you?” And he said, “You almost fell 
over.” 

That’s not exactly the way I remember 
it, but I do remember him asking me that 
question and then smiled because he knew 
that I wasn’t. He knew I’d been actively 
involved in the Republican Party for several 
years. It was an honor for me to have been 
appointed by Governor O’Callaghan because 
I had so much respect for him. 



34 


Howard D. McKibben 


Right, right. 

Then when I was appointed to the state 
bench. I had to run in two years. Fortunately I 
did not have an opponent for the position. The 
court’s jurisdiction included both Douglas 
County and Lyon County. Later, the Nevada 
legislature enacted legislation in which 
Douglas County became a separate judicial 
district. I really did enjoy traveling to other 
jurisdictions to hear cases. I would go to Las 
Vegas and hear some of the high profile cases 
in Clark County that the judges there had 
reassigned. It was a very interesting period 
of our life. 

I think I read somewhere you handled at least 
350 cases, something like that, over the period 
of time you were district attorney. You did tell 
me about some of those, including a DUI case 
for a man stranded on a snow bank, a more 
serious case involving capital murder, and I just 
wondered if there were other cases from that 
time that you wanted to chat about. 

During that period when I was district 
attorney, there were a number of cases 
that involved the Tahoe Regional Planning 
Agency. When Ronald Reagan was governor 
of California and Paul Laxalt was governor of 
Nevada, the states entered into a cooperative 
agreement, which ultimately became the 
interstate compact creating the Tahoe 
Regional Planning Agency. The compact was 
adopted by the Congress. 

While I was district attorney we handled 
disputes between the county and the Tahoe 
Regional Planning Agency. A group of 
citizens in Douglas County conducted an 
“election,” to secede from the Tahoe Regional 
Planning Agency. They set up garbage cans or 
cans that looked like garbage cans a distance 
from the polling booths and distributed 


ballots so the residents of the county could 
vote on seceding from the Tahoe Regional 
Planning Agency. 

Of course, I advised the county 
commissioners that was not a lawful election; 
that the county itself could not withdraw 
from the interstate compact. Congress would 
have to act. Notwithstanding that, the county 
commissioners certified the election. It didn’t 
go much beyond that, but I do recall that 
there was a lawsuit filed and the grand jury 
hired special counsel to advise on that. 

As a consequence, the county spent quite 
a bit of money, with the end result being, 
of course, that the county couldn’t void 
the interstate compact. So it was a stressful 
period. 

I recall there were three individuals who 
signed a petition to have me recalled as 
district attorney because of my legal advice. 
It was filed with the county clerk, but it 
never did garner any signatures, so it was 
not a serious effort. But it was, again, one of 
those periods where there was a great deal 
of concern by people in the county about 
the scope of the interstate compact. The 
environmentalists were concerned about 
the purity and the condition of Lake Tahoe, 
and the property owners felt their properties 
were being devalued without compensation. 
All the factions had very legitimate concerns. 
But the process that was being employed by 
certain groups made the job of the district 
attorney difficult but exciting. 

Was that the time that some people refer to 
sometimes as the Sagebrush Rebellion? 

The Sagebrush Rebellion, I think, was 
more in the eastern part of Nevada; it dealt 
with the cattlemen and others who were 
concerned about federal regulations. This was 
just concentrated on the interstate compact. 



The Bench 


35 


I see. 

I always had a keen interest in juvenile 
matters, and we established the China Springs 
Youth Camp. It was an experiment. We didn’t 
have any funding from the legislature to do 
it. Our thought was that we would develop a 
youth camp that would house incorrigibles, 
those who had engaged in conduct that 
involved crimes that were less serious than 
felonies. They were not crimes of violence. 

In order to secure funding, we held a 
fundraiser at Lake Tahoe. Frankie Avalon 
and Smokey Robinson performed, and they 
donated their time. The event was held at the 
lake at one of the showrooms, and we garnered 
enough money from that performance to have 
the seed money to develop the camp. One of 
the ranchers in the Carson Valley, Stoddard 
Jacobson, donated the land for the camp. We 
started out with a small group of juvenile 
offenders. 

The idea was that it would be a work- 
release facility. During the day juveniles would 
work on projects in the community. On other 
occasions they would be involved with the 
wilderness program. The juveniles would 
spend time with counselors on strenuous 
outdoor activity. 

The recidivism rate, we found, was very 
low, and as a result the camp expanded, and 
today it’s funded almost exclusively by the 
state. It has become a model and has grown 
now beyond what we originally envisioned it 
to be. I think it has proven to be a very, very 
successful venture in our effort to cope with 
the juvenile problems. 

Was that the first youth detention facility like 
that in the state? 

Yes, where it was privately funded and 
operated exclusively by the county. Because 


it had such merit, I think, the legislature 
ultimately assumed the control and funding 
of the facility. 

Are there any other facilities like it now in the 
state? 

I’m not aware of any. The other thing 
I really enjoyed were adoptions. I had the 
right to engage in private practice. In those 
days, they allowed the district attorneys to 
have private practice, as well as perform their 
duties for the county. During that period, 
I would handle adoptions. I did not charge 
a fee. I would ask the parents, the adoptive 
parents, to take whatever money they would 
have paid me and place it in a trust account 
for the child. Those proceedings were very 
special to me, primarily because of my 
background, having been adopted. I think I 
was one of the first judges to allow cameras 
in the courtroom to record and memorialize 
those special adoption hearings. The activities 
with the juveniles, where I think we really did 
make a difference in the long run and then the 
adoptions, where you’re giving a child a new 
life made me very proud to serve as a judge. 
I really enjoyed that aspect of my career. 

There aren’t too many happy occasions in court. 

There aren’t. You have the adoptions, 
and then, in the federal system, I had the 
naturalization proceedings. And those are 
the happy occasions. Everybody wins. So I’ve 
enjoyed those moments a great deal. 

Right. Were there other criminal matters that 
you handled as district attorney that stick out 
in your mind? 

I’m trying to recall. I do know that during 
that period when I was district attorney, 



36 


Howard D. McKibben 


the county sheriff was involved in quite a 
tragic incident with an automobile. He was 
criminally prosecuted. While I was involved 
initially in those proceedings, because I also 
represented the sheriff as district attorney, the 
matter was transferred to a special prosecutor. 

Ray Jeffers from Las Vegas, who was 
a deputy district attorney, prosecuted that 
case. It was tried in Hawthorne while he was 
acquitted of the charges, he resigned as sheriff 
and that ended his public career. 

As district attorney, there’s probably occasions 
when the actions you, by necessity, have to take 
anger people. Have you ever felt threatened by 
anyone in any situation? 

I didn’t feel particularly threatened. I do 
recall, right after I was elected, I attended a 
town meeting in one of the small communities 
in Douglas County. It was in Genoa, which is 
the oldest town in the state. The discussion 
centered on water rights. It involved a system 
of little canals for water. That’s the way people 
irrigated their lawns in this community. There 
was some concern about the amount of water 
they were receiving. Some had allocations for 
thirteen minutes and some for twenty minutes, 
some for thirty minutes. I’m not sure that all 
of them liked the advice I was giving on that 
so I quickly learned you can’t satisfy everyone. 

Right. But no one has ever taken a shot at you 
or anything like that? 

Oh, that’s right. Now you did remind me 
of that. Right after I became district attorney, 
I thought I’d go out during the course of 
investigations and provide legal advice to the 
law enforcement officials who were involved 
in the investigations. One of cases involved 
a situation where a man was in a house. The 
authorities believed he had a gun and he 


wouldn’t come out. So I drove my car to the 
scene along one of the streets in Gardnerville. 

I was driving our Datsun 260Z. As I 
approached the house along the street, I saw 
somebody in the window and I saw a flash. 
I ducked because I thought someone was 
shooting at me. I kept driving the car and I had 
my head positioned on the passenger seat. I 
kept driving beyond the home until I thought 
I was safe. 

Then I got out of the car, the officers 
checked it and found a bullet hole in the side 
of the passenger door directly above where my 
head had been on the seat. If the bullet had 
come all the way through the door, it would 
have gone in the top of my skull. Fortunately, 
the door stopped it. It hit a metal piece inside 
the door and that stopped the bullet. Another 
bullet was found out on the street. 

After the individual was arrested, they 
found out that he thought that I was a 
boyfriend of his girlfriend and that I was 
driving a car similar to what, apparently, he 
thought was the boyfriend’s car. So a case of, 
perhaps, mistaken identity. But it was a very 
tense situation, and I decided after that I would 
let the police and the sheriff’s office conduct 
the investigations. I would give legal advice 
and prosecute the cases that I thought were 
the appropriate cases to prosecute. 

Less dangerous. 

Exactly. 

My father always told me it was better to do 
battle with a pen than with another weapon. 

You know, that’s true. I like that. I’ll have 
to remember that. 

Of course, in 1977you are sworn in as a district 
judge. I think it was .... 



The Bench 


37 


One thing I might mention before we get 
to that. 

Oh, sure. 

I did enjoy the administrative work with 
other district attorneys. I was fortunate to be 
the president of the Nevada District Attorneys 
Association during that period. We worked 
very diligently with the legislature on pay bills 
and legislation that impacted the prosecutors 
throughout the state. I really enjoyed working 
with the attorney general, Richard Bryan. 
He later became governor. He was very, very 
helpful with the district attorneys in trying 
to pass legislation that would benefit law 
enforcement in our communities. 

In particular, I recall during that period 
that we were able to secure legislation in 
Nevada that strengthened the laws on child 
abuse. 

I recall vividly when my son was in the 
hospital. He required surgery on his thumb. 
There was another child in the same room. 
That child’s head had been severely damaged 
as a result of a blow from a stepfather. He was 
either a stepfather or a boyfriend. I made some 
inquiries and found out that the maximum 
penalty for that at the time would have been 
not more than six months in county jail. I 
vowed then that we should do something 
about the laws on child abuse. Through the 
Nevada District Attorneys Association and 
the assistance of the attorney general, we were 
able to strengthen the laws on child abuse and 
that was a very positive response to some very 
tragic cases. 

I’m sure. What year were you elected, do you 
recall? 

I went in as district attorney in 1971, and 
was reelected in 1975. 


Did you spend time in Carson City lobbying? 

I did give testimony. Certainly I was there 
talking with legislative representatives, either 
the state senators or assembly members, and it 
was an interesting experience in the legislative 
process. I had always been very interested in 
the legislative process anyway, and this was a 
chance to see how they conducted business 
in Carson City. 

Sure. Those are important and significant 
contributions affecting children and colleagues 
working as district attorneys or prosecutors. 
It must have been very gratifying to be part 
of that. 

It was. It really was. 

Is there anything else from that time as district 
attorney in Douglas County that you recall that 
you would like to relate? 

As district attorney, we also represented 
the school board because it was a small 
county. I thoroughly enjoyed that because 
my parents’ background was in education, as 
I mentioned earlier. I would attend the school 
board meetings and give them legal advice 
on various aspects of educational issues such 
as salaries, benefits, contracts for the school, 
new construction for the school, any issues 
that involved the school districts. And I found 
that to be a rewarding part of the job we did 
in our office. 

In terms of population, about how big was 
Douglas County at that time? 

I think at that time we were probably, 
oh, between 15 and 20,000 population. That 
would include both the Carson Valley and the 
Lake Tahoe area—Douglas County included 



38 


Howard D. McKibben 


both the valley area, which is at the eastern 
base of the Sierra Nevada Mountains, and the 
south end of Lake Tahoe from Highway 50 
approximately down to the state line. So even 
though the population may have been 15,000 
to 20,000, it would swell on weekends and the 
summer to 100,000 or 150,000 because of the 
tourists that would come to the south end of 
Lake Tahoe. That had a very significant impact 
on our caseload. 

I do recall that, I think it was the last year 
I was district attorney, they had the bombing 
at Harvey’s Casino at Lake Tahoe. We were 
involved in some of those early stages before 
I went on the state bench, in connection with 
the investigations involving that bombing. 

And if you had to guess today the population 
of that same area, what would it be? 

I would think now that it must be 30,000 
to 40,000. I’m not really certain, but I know 
that it’s one of the two or three fastest-growing 
communities in Nevada, and Nevada happens 
to be one of the one or two fastest-growing 
states in the country. So population-wise, it 
has really exploded. 

We moved there because we loved the 
scenery and the rural atmosphere. It reminded 
us of the Pyrenees Mountains between Spain 
and France. In fact, there were a number of 
Basques that resided in the valley. Mary Ann 
and I loved to take our children out to eat at 
the Basque restaurants. 

I’ll never forget when I first moved to 
the Carson Valley in 1967 and was working 
with George Abbott we would have those 
wonderful Basque dinners. The very first time 
I went to the Overland Hotel, which was a 
Basque restaurant we had a picon punch. I’d 
never had a picon punch before, and I can 
understand why they call it a punch because 
it was a very strong drink. But it was a sweet 


drink and you didn’t realize it until you 
finished it. That was my perhaps one and only 
picon punch. But it was quite an experience 
for me particularly since I really don’t care for 
alcoholic beverages. 

If you like, we can turn to your experiences at 
Douglas County. I guess originally Douglas 
County and Lyon County district judge . . . 

That’s right. 

and that was originally the Third District. 

That’s right. 

You’re sworn in as the successor to Noel 
Manoukian. Do you recall your first day going 
on the bench? 

I recall being nervous, because it certainly 
is—I’d been in the court a lot, so it was a little 
easier for me. And of course, I was in the same 
courtroom where I had been practicing. But 
even though I had been on the other side of 
the bench and worked with juries, it was quite 
a different experience for me to go through 
the selection process, where I’m neutral and 
not an advocate. And I found that different 
and challenging, but it seemed to flow fairly 
easily. I don’t think I was as nervous when 
I went on the bench and handled my first 
trial as I was when I was a prosecutor and 
handled my first trial in court. I had been in 
court enough by then that it was a fairly easy 
transition. 



5 

Trial Procedure 


At that time, did the State of Nevada offer any 
kind of training or schooling for new judges? 

They did. Shortly after I became a district 
judge, I attended the National Judicial College 
in Reno and took the three-week course, 
which was an intensive course for new judges, 
state judges. I found it very valuable. The 
courses on evidence, and trial practice, were 
excellent and issues that were our bread and 
butter, what we had to do. What I found most 
valuable about it was the interchange with 
other judges from around the country. The 
experiences that they had and the common 
concerns that they had about recurring 
problems, particularly working with juries 
and the jury selection process, the voir dire 
and trial procedures and nuances that would 
come up during the course of the trial. That I 
found very, very valuable. I think the National 
Judicial College has performed a very valuable 
service to our judiciary over all these years. We 
are very fortunate that it is located in Reno. 

In fact, shortly after that, I started teaching 
at the National Judicial College. I taught 


there for about twenty years. I taught Fourth 
Amendment issues. Then I taught sentencing 
issues and then I taught jury issues, and most 
recently I’ve been working some on their 
international program. I found it very, very 
worthwhile. The most fascinating part of the 
course is the interchange with other judges. 

Oh, I’m sure. Thinking about that experience 
way back in 1977, in talking with other judges 
from around the country, you mentioned that 
one of the issues that everyone had an opinion 
or experience with or wanted to talk about was 
voir dire. What about the voir dire process was 
significant? 

Just to be able to balance the rights of 
jurors to have some privacy and not have to 
expose their whole life, and yet ensure that we 
secure a fair cross-section of the community 
of jurors who will be fair and impartial, both 
to the government and to the defense or to 
the plaintiff and defendant in civil cases, and 
to make it comfortable for the jurors. I always 
have felt—and I continued on the federal 



40 


Howard D. McKibben 


bench to feel this way—that jurors provide 
an incredibly wonderful service, the time that 
they take, the commitment that they have to 
make in order to serve on juries, and they’re 
not paid very much for their services. 

I like it to be a really pleasant experience 
for them and a learning experience for them. 
I like them to be able to say afterwards that, 
“Maybe initially we didn’t want to serve on 
this trial, but we’re really pleased that we did.” 
My staff and I always do everything we can to 
consider the jurors to be the most important 
people in that courtroom. I really consider the 
jurors to be the best goodwill ambassadors we 
have in the community. If they have a good 
experience, that will say volumes about our 
criminal justice system and our civil justice 
system. We take a lot of extra effort to make 
sure that jurors are comfortable, that they are 
well cared for, that they understand what is 
going on. We try to simplify jury instructions. 
We try to do everything we can to make the 
process an understandable and simplified and 
yet fair process for everybody, including the 
jury. 

I know some judges take a very active role of 
voir dire and do all the questioning themselves. 
What do you do? 

I have a hybrid system where I ask a 
lot of the questions, but then I open it up 
to the attorneys to ask questions, follow¬ 
up questions. I probably allowed more 
questioning by the attorneys when I was on 
the state bench than I have on the federal 
bench, and I think maybe that’s just because 
of experience over the years. Having been on 
the bench for a number of years, I know the 
range of questions in the types of cases that 
we have. And it’s been my experience that the 
attorneys, by and large, are fairly satisfied with 
the questions that are asked and the attorneys 


ask very few questions afterwards. I do have 
the attorneys submit a list of questions to 
me, and then from those, I’ll select the ones 
that I think should be asked. Then I allow 
attorneys, on a limited basis, to do the follow¬ 
up questions, and I’ve never had a problem 
with that. 

I do know that there were some techniques 
that we used from the time I first went on the 
bench that we’re still talking about. In fact, 
at our judicial conference we are still talking 
about jury issues that we adopted twenty- 
nine years ago when I first went on the state 
bench, including the right of jurors to ask 
questions. I’ve allowed jurors to ask questions 
ever since I went on the bench. They have to 
write them out. I’ve always allowed jurors 
to take notes, to try to work out a schedule 
that accommodates the jurors if that means 
a partial day or a whole day, whatever seems 
to work best for that jury and for the type 
of trial that we have. We’ve been doing that 
either on the state bench or federal bench 
since I’ve been a judge for some thirty-three 
years. It’s interesting to see that judges still do 
things differently, and those are matters we 
talk about at the Judicial College too. But it 
always has worked well and I’ve always been 
very pleased with the jury process. 

Of course, as the only judge in a particular 
district, you just take what comes in the door, 
I suppose. 

You do.... 

You don’t have much choice. 

unless you have a bias or a prejudice on 
a case. Whether you really want to hear that 
case particularly or not, it’s your obligation— 
the oath that you take requires you to resolve 
those disputes. While I was district attorney, 



Trial Procedure 


41 


I had a calendar in both Douglas and Lyon 
counties. Every Monday I would drive to 
court in Yerington. It was about an hour drive. 
I would start out early in the morning. Having 
grown up in a farming community, I was an 
early riser and I usually liked to start my cases 
at eight or eight-thirty in the morning. 

There were many occasions when I had 
to start out a half an hour earlier than usual 
because there would be sheep drives and 
cattle drives, and I would be stranded there 
on the road waiting for maybe ten or fifteen 
minutes until they could move the animals 
into the fields. I always found that really 
fascinating to just think, there I am in my car 
weaving among the sheep or cattle, and what 
a wonderful area we lived in. It was a treat to 
have served in Lyon County too. 

How long did that last that you were judging 
both counties before the legislature reorganized? 

I think that was about three years, and then 
we worked with the legislature during that 
period and they adopted a redistricting plan 
for the courts. Lyon County and Churchill 
County became one district and Douglas 
County became the Ninth Judicial District 
Court. Ultimately, two judges were assigned to 
our court and we split off from Lyon County. 
Judge Robison became the other judge while 
I was there in Douglas County. 

Not long after you became a judge, one case, 
I think, that came before you involved the 
Herman [phonetic] estate. Do you recall that? 

I do. That was a case that I inherited. Judge 
Manoukian presided over that case before 
he went on the Supreme Court. It was a case 
that involved the probate of an estate in Lyon 
County, and the attorneys had filed a petition 
for fees for absent heirs, as I recall. I reduced 


the fees and referred certain portions of that 
case to the state bar for further investigation. 
That was a very difficult decision on my part, 
but one that I felt was appropriate under the 
circumstances because of affidavits that had 
been filed in that case. It resulted in actions 
by the Board of Governors of the State Bar of 
Nevada and also by the Supreme Court on 
the case that I had. I recall it vividly because 
I had injured myself in racquetball and was 
sitting there during those hearings with my 
leg in a cast. 

Oh, my goodness. 

But it was a difficult case. Had you heard 
about that case in another context.... 

Oh, in just going through some of the newspaper 
files .... 

Oh, some of the newspaper clippings, yes. 

I came across that one, so I made a note here 
to ask you about it. 

Right. 

Are there other cases from that period as a 
district judge for the state that stand out in 
your mind? 

I remember one case where the prosecutor 
in Douglas County had filed criminal charges 
against a midwife, and the question was 
whether or not a midwife could be prosecuted 
criminally for practicing medicine without a 
license. I held a hearing and I had midwives in 
the audience. I had mothers who were actually 
nursing their babies in the courtroom, and 
there were pediatricians in the courtroom. 
It was a highly charged case. I ultimately 
ruled in that case that a midwife could not be 



42 


Howard D. McKibben 


criminally prosecuted under existing statutes 
because the legislature had not clearly and 
unequivocally criminalized midwifery. So 
that terminated that prosecution. 

To the best of my knowledge, for many 
years thereafter and perhaps up to the current 
time, there are still provisions in the statutes 
in Nevada that refer to midwives. I don’t know 
that the legislature has ever criminalized 
or indicated that midwifery is the unlawful 
practice of medicine but I doubt it because I 
know midwives are still delivering babies in 
the state. I held that if the legislature were to 
criminalize the practice, they’d have to do so 
expressly and clearly and that it really was up 
to the legislature to make that determination. 
But a person couldn’t be prosecuted for 
serving as a midwife and delivering a child 
unless the statute clearly made that a crime. 

I tried to make it a point to sit in courts 
throughout the state. I think I missed sitting 
in only one jurisdiction during the period I 
was on the state bench. I probably would have 
served there, except I went on the federal 
bench and didn’t get a chance to. But I really 
enjoyed going to other courtrooms, whether 
it was in Tonopah, or Austin and Eureka, Elko 
and Lovelock. It was really enjoyable to sit in 
those jurisdictions. 

What’s the process that determines visiting 
judges going to a different jurisdiction? 

If a judge had a conflict, then we could be 
appointed through the supreme court. I was 
always willing to do that, as long as we had 
time to do it, because I enjoyed that a great 
deal. 

While you were a district judge, were there 
ever attempts to create an intermediate court 
of appeals in the state? 


They talked about that, and I have always 
been in favor of it because the caseload of 
the supreme court is so large. They should 
either expand the number of the supreme 
court justices or have an intermediate court 
of appeals. There were a number of efforts to 
do that, and the voters were not in favor of 
creating it, even up to the current time. But 
that’s never been approved, so I don’t know 
whether there’ll be another effort to do that 
or not. 

Interesting. Did you ever sit on the supreme 
court with Noel Manoukian? 

I did, because when I sat there he was on 
the court, and I also recall sitting in other 
jurisdictions on death penalty cases. They 
would have three-judge panels to determine 
the penalty and I’d be called upon to sit on 
those cases. 

The actual procedure within the state, was that 
by statute? 

It was, yes. It was, and so I did that on 
occasion. I recall one of the very difficult 
cases that I handled was on assignment to 
Carson City, it involved the death of a young 
child. The question was whether the child’s 
death was accidental or whether the mother 
and stepfather were criminally responsible. 
The defendants were ultimately convicted of 
I believe second-degree murder. It was a very 
tragic case. There was evidence in that case of 
what’s called forensic odontology, which was 
dental impressions of bite marks on the child. 
It was the first case that I’d handled involving 
human bite marks on a child. 

I was concerned about the publicity and 
the impact a hearing on the admissibility of 
that evidence would have on jury selection. 



Trial Procedure 


43 


I convened a hearing, which was a public 
hearing at six o’clock the morning of the 
trial, and nobody from the media was there. 
We had a hearing. I made my ruling, and we 
started selecting the jury at eight-thirty in the 
morning. So the jurors were not aware of the 
issues. The publicity wasn’t before them at that 
point, so it made jury selection easier. 

We kept our hearings open. I have always 
strongly believed that, except in exceptional 
circumstances, court proceedings should not 
be closed unless it’s to protect minors, or if 
there are statutorily authorized reasons for 
closing hearings or trials. 

What are your feelings about cameras in the 
courtroom? 

I have mixed feelings. Cameras were 
authorized in the courtroom in the state 
court. At some point while I was a state 
district judge. I actually allowed cameras in 
the courtroom for adoption proceedings, 
before they were legislatively authorized. I 
just felt these were special occasions. I’ll never 
forget holding twins in my arms as they were 
adopted. I allowed the parents to bring their 
cameras in and record the hearing. 

Once the legislature authorized cameras 
I did have the cameras recording the 
proceedings on occasion, but we would 
always do so under structured conditions and 
only allow one camera. If there were several 
agencies that were interested, then they’d have 
to pool their resources to have one camera. 
And I never allowed them to him the jury or 
minors on the stand. They were very careful 
about that and always honored the rules and 
regulations that we set out. I really didn’t find 
it to be a problem. 

I’m not sure that it would be a major 
problem in the federal court. On balance, 


I would be willing to have cameras if that’s 
what’s authorized. I think the O. J. Simpson 
case and other cases like that might suggest 
that cameras can be a distraction. If that 
happens, I don’t think the interests of justice 
are served by having cameras. I think you have 
to be very, very careful about developing very 
clear regulations. 

I know that’s a matter that’s still under 
discussion by the Judicial Conference. The 
conference has allowed experimentation 
with it in the federal circuit courts. I think 
the Ninth Circuit does permit cameras 
at hearings. I’m somewhat neutral on the 
subject. I like the public to be able to know, 
but it isn’t my experience that they televise 
very many proceedings from gavel to gavel. 
They give the public snippets and it doesn’t 
give you a full flavor of what’s happened. I 
think that can be unfortunate, too, but that’s 
the nature of the media. 

Right. Right. They look for the .... 

That’s right, the kind of sensational part. 

the sensational. Absolutely. You mentioned 
earlier today that when you were a district 
attorney, you were president of the Nevada 
District Attorneys Association. Is there a 
similar organization for state judges? 

There was, yes, and I was fortunate to 
be elected as president of the Nevada Judges 
Association. We worked hard on benefits for 
judges and salaries for judges, and that was 
rewarding work too. 

Going back to interesting cases that I 
handled there was a case in Lyon County 
that involved a woman who had developed 
aplastic anemia. This was a condition in which 
she had a deterioration of white cell counts 



44 


Howard D. McKibben 


and, therefore, she was not immune from 
almost any type of infection. This was a rare 
condition, and it was alleged that this was 
caused by ingesting Chloromycetin, which, in 
the early fifties, I recall, when I was growing 
up, was a wonder drug. But the warning label 
indicates that a statistically provable number 
of individuals can develop aplastic anemia 
from taking that drug. 

The suit was against a very respected 
doctor in Lyon County who still made 
house calls and he’d been prescribing this 
medication. I recall there were a number of 
attorneys from the Reno area and elsewhere 
that were involved in that case. We had a 
member of Ralph Naders organization there. 
A Dr. Kruger of Stanford, who was one of the 
foremost hematologists in the world, testified. 

There was evidence that this woman 
developed—when she was at Stanford being 
treated, a thyroid storm. Her temperature 
went up to 106 or 107 degrees, and she was 
immersed in ice and that kept her alive. 
Ultimately, she did survive that attack. 

The jury was deadlocked on the issue 
of negligence. We set it for retrial and they 
resolved the case, but it was one of the most 
interesting cases I have heard. 

One of the things I enjoy as much about 
the bench as anything is that human drama 
is being played out every day in some form. 
It’s like a different chapter in a book that you 
look forward to every day. 

It must be. It must be very rewarding to have 
that kind of intellectual challenge constantly. 

It is. It is. And it’s really rewarding when 
you get letters from jurors who have served 
and they tell you in their letter that initially 
they didn’t want to serve. They thought it 
would take too much time. But they found 
it to be one of the most valuable experiences 


that they’ve ever had. It’s nice when you get 
something like that. That really makes it all 
worthwhile. 

Do you get complaining letters too? 

I don’t recall ever receiving one from a 
juror, but I certainly have received such letters 
where we have cases involving tax protesters. 

I’m sure every judge does. 

Right, and some of them can be somewhat 
threatening, and that’s just part of your job. 
You trust that people will not follow through 
with those types of threats. You can’t live in 
fear. 



6 

Reflections as a Federal Judge 


I believe it was in 1984 that you got nominated 
for the federal bench. Can you tell me the 
circumstances behind that? 

I knew that there had been new legislation 
that created a federal judgeship in Nevada. 
I hadn’t really given a lot of thought to it. 
Our family was in northern Idaho visiting 
my sister when we received a telephone call 
suggesting that I should express my interest in 
the judgeship by letting Senator Laxalt know. I 
really didn’t have access to a typewriter when 
I was there. So I went to the local library and 
I prepared a handwritten letter and sent it 
to Senator Laxalt and expressed my interest. 
Later, Clark Guild, who was designated as part 
of a selection committee for Senator Laxalt, 
commented about the handwritten letter and 
that they thought that was quite nice to receive 
a handwritten letter. 

After that, I then returned to Nevada, 
and it was, I think, Bill Senate, who was on 
Senator Laxalt’s staff, interviewed those who 
were interested in the position. After that, 
the FBI started doing background checks on 


me, and they, at the same time, were doing 
background checks on Melvin Brunetti. Mel 
and I discussed it because we weren’t certain 
whether we were both being considered for 
this position or just what was happening. We 
thought it was unusual that the FBI would be 
asking questions about both of us when they 
were out talking with neighbors and members 
of the legal profession. 

But he wasn’t a judge at that time, was he? 

No. He was in private practice and he’d 
been in private practice earlier with Senator 
Laxalt in his firm in Carson. We talked about 
it and discovered that it appeared that he was 
being considered for the Ninth Circuit Court 
of Appeals and that I was under consideration 
for the district judgeship in Nevada. They did 
that background, and this was, in July that 
we got the word. This was an election year. 
President Reagan was in his first term and 
was running for reelection. 

They finished the background in the early 
fall and we knew the Congress was going to 



46 


Howard D. McKibben 


recess in October. Senator Laxalt called one 
day and said, “Howard, we’ve had to make a 
decision on which of these spots to fill, and 
because of the critical need in Nevada and the 
district court for a new judge because of the 
situation in the south where Judge Claiborne’s 
position was in limbo and the huge backlog of 
cases there,” he said, “we’ve decided that you 
should go first and that we’ll fill the Circuit 
position after the election.” He said, “You need 
to get on an airplane and come back here. 
Your name has been moved to one of the ten 
that will be considered before the Congress 
adjourns.” 

Mary Ann and I immediately made 
reservations and flew out that day, took the 
red-eye to Washington, D.C. When we got 
back to Washington, I talked with Duke 
Short. Duke Short was the administrative 
assistant to Senator Strom Thurman. At that 
point, the Senate Judiciary Committee was 
already out of session. The Congress was still 
in session, but they were going to adjourn 
the following day. I talked with Duke Short, 
and Duke Short advised me of the questions 
that he expected the Senator would be asking 
me. When I first walked into his office, I was 
concerned because I saw stacks of boxes there 
that had the word “protest” on them, and I 
asked him, “Are there that many protests to 
my nomination?” 

He laughed and said, “Oh no. We haven’t 
had any protests to your nomination. Those 
are all for Ed Meese.” Ed Meese was being 
considered for attorney general at that point 
and these were boxes that related to his 
confirmation. I breathed a sigh of relief. And 
he gave me the questions that he thought 
Senator Thurman might be asking. I went over 
to the Library of Congress with Mary Ann and 
we did a little additional research on the issues 
that might arise during the questioning at the 
judiciary committee hearing the next day. 


Then I went to the capitol the next morning 
to testify in the hearing room of the Senate 
Judiciary Committee. This was interesting, 
because I sat down at the witness table and 
Mary Ann was right behind me. Senator 
Thurman was the only person from the 
Judiciary Committee that was there, other than 
Senator Laxalt, and he was there to introduce 
me along with Senator Hecht, who was our 
other senator, the junior senator. So Mary Ann 
sat right behind me and Senator Laxalt was 
to my side and Senator Hecht the other side. 
Senator Thurman came in as the only member 
of the committee. The way it apparently works 
when they’re out of session on the judiciary 
committee is that they send a box around with 
white balls and black balls in it. 

Almost like a fraternity election, [laughs] 

Almost like that. And if all white balls are 
dropped by the senators on the committee, 
then you’ll be approved. If one black ball is 
dropped, that’s the end of your nomination, 
at least for that session. 

When Senator Thurman came in, I saw 
him speak with Duke Short for a moment. 
I didn’t know what he was saying. Then he 
proceeded to ask me questions, and they 
were similar to what I thought perhaps I’d be 
asked. He was interested in judicial activism, 
even in those days, and issues about the death 
penalty and whether or not judges should 
be responsible for administering prisons 
and schools and issues of that nature. After 
I responded to those questions, Senator 
Thurman thanked me and I thanked him and 
we talked with each other for several minutes 
and with Senator Laxalt. And then at the end, 
I said to Duke Short, “I noticed that Senator 
Thurman said something to you when he 
walked in.” I said, “Do you mind if I ask what 
he said?” 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


47 


He said, “No, it’s perfectly fine. It really 
wasn’t that confidential.” Senator Thurman 
said, ‘Who’s that pretty little lady behind the 
judge?’ I said, ‘Well, that’s the judge’s wife.’ 
And he says, ‘Well, we need to confirm this 
judge.’” [laughter] So I’m not sure if I was 
selected on merit or because of my dear wife, 
Mary Ann. 

As I recall, Senator Thurman had quite an eye 
for the ladies. 

Then we went back and watched the 
proceedings on the Senate floor. We were 
told that they were going to adjourn and that 
we could fly home because they are going to 
act on the judges early in the morning. At 
three o’clock the following morning we were 
advised that the Senate had adjourned, and 
just before adj ournment, my name, along with 
nine others, had been approved, and we just 
awaited the signature of President Reagan on 
my commission. 

Before this happened, I did receive a call 
from President Reagan. 

A personal call? 

A personal call. I was in my chambers in 
Douglas County and my secretary Beverly 
said, “The president’s on the line.” I said, “what 
president” and she said “the President of the 
United States.” I knew what he probably was 
calling about, but it was still unexpected. 
I didn’t know that he called the nominees. 
I got on the telephone, and the president’s 
administrative assistant was on the line 
and she said, “If you’ll hold just a minute, 
Judge, I’ll put President Carter on.” And 
she said, “Oh dear, did I say Carter? I’ve 
been with so many presidents.” She said, 
“Please don’t say anything about that to the 
president.” [laughter] Now, maybe I should 


have maintained that confidence, but I 
thought it was funny. 

We joked about it and I told her I wouldn’t 
tell the president. And then President Reagan 
came on and he was so gracious. He said he 
was just delighted to be placing my name in 
nomination, that he had the highest regard 
for Senator Laxalt, whom he considered an 
outstanding public servant and an outstanding 
person. He said Senator Laxalt said I was the 
right person for the position. He also said he 
had looked at my qualifications, he felt that I 
was well qualified and that it was an honor for 
him to appoint me to the judgeship. We had 
a very pleasant discussion. It probably lasted 
two or three minutes, and at the end, I’ll never 
forget he said, “And God bless you and God 
bless your family, Judge McKibben.” I thought 
it was really a very warm and touching thing 
for the president to take the time to call, 
which obviously he didn’t have to do. It was 
something that we’ll always remember. 

You’re not the first judge who’s told me that... 

Is that right? 

a story like that. Apparently, it was a hallmark 
of him and I think it speaks volumes about the 
kind of man he was. 

It really does. It does. 

It’s extraordinary. 

Yes, it was nice. Yes, it was a very moving 
moment for me to have been able to talk with 
the president. You don’t do that very often, 
and especially if they call like that, so it was a 
nice touch. 

And your nomination and confirmation, it’s so 
unusual, given the circumstances today. 



48 


Howard D. McKibben 


It was, in a sense, quite extraordinary, to 
go through the process—in such a short time. 
I think a lot of that can be attributed to Senator 
Laxalt and the tremendous respect he had in 
the Senate. I certainly was honored to have 
the president call me and nominate me. I was 
also extremely honored to have had Senator 
Laxalt be the person that presented my name 
to the president, because I have always had 
the highest regard for Senator Laxalt and 
have from the early days when I first came out 
here and met him. He served this state with 
great distinction as our lieutenant governor 
and then governor and senator, and so it was 
a great honor for me to have Senator Laxalt 
show confidence in me for the judgeship. 

There was something else I was going to 
say about that. I have these senior moments. 
You know, the great thing about having a 
senior moment is that you can hide your own 
Easter eggs, [laughter] 

I understand there were circumstances that 
came to light regarding this position that 
made you stop and think hard about whether 
you wanted to accept President Reagan’s 
nomination to the U. S. District Court. 

That’s true. At about the time that 
my name was going to go forward and it 
appeared that my nomination would go 
before the Senate, I received word from 
Carol Fitzgerald, who was then the clerk of 
the court for the district of Nevada, and she 
advised me that the judges had determined 
that the duty station for this new position 
that had been created under the omnibus 
court bill, and that’s what this position was, 
would be Las Vegas, and that was the first 
time I knew that. I had always assumed that 
the position would be in Reno. 

At that point, my son and daughter were 
in middle school, early high school years, 


and so we had a family counsel and talked 
in some depth about whether or not I could 
make this transition. We didn’t want to move 
to Las Vegas. I thought it was unfair to have 
my family move to Las Vegas, even though 
they would have been willing to make those 
sacrifices, especially when your children are 
in high school and it’s a very important period 
of their lives. 

We were able to make arrangements 
to accommodate everyone. I rented an 
apartment in Las Vegas and went to Las Vegas 
on either late Sunday evening or early Monday 
mornings and would be involved with the 
court in Las Vegas then Monday, Tuesday, 
and Wednesday and Thursday. And then 
Thursday evening I would fly back to Reno 
and hear cases in Reno on Friday and spend 
the weekend with my family, and then do the 
same thing the following week. 

I did that for about two years until we were 
able to transfer to Reno. And then I spent a 
good deal of my time in Reno. That was a very 
difficult time because it meant that I couldn’t 
attend all of the events that I wanted to when 
my children were in high school, whether it 
was tennis matches and other activities. But 
it worked out well after the first two years. 

I will always be so grateful to my family 
for making the accommodations that they 
could make so that I could fulfill a lifetime 
dream to be on the federal bench and also 
spend quality time with my family, which, 
frankly, was the most important thing to me. 
Family has always been more important than 
a job or anything else. It worked out, but it was 
definitely a difficult period for all of us. 

It was sort of a twentieth century version of 
the old circuit judges of the nineteenth century. 

Riding the circuit, right, and I did that 
in the state court. I was riding the circuit, 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


49 


because I went from Douglas County to Lyon 
County, Churchill County, and other places. 
And I frequently, as I indicated earlier, went 
to Las Vegas a great deal, but at least I was 
home. My base was home, whereas initially 
on the federal court, my duty station was in 
Las Vegas. Fortunately, it only lasted about 
two years. 

You had a very quick swearing-in, as I 
understand it. 

Right. 

Tell me the circumstances behind that. 

As soon as I got the word in San Francisco, 
as we were flying home, that the Senate had 
confirmed the appointment by giving their 
advice and consent. I was able to wrap up 
my court duties in Douglas County rather 
quickly. Within five days after that, I took the 
oath. It was on October 12, 1984. We held a 
ceremony later on, both in Las Vegas and 
Reno, but the official oath was administered 
by Judge Reed in Reno on October 12, 1984. 
And then shortly after that, I was on my way 
to Las Vegas to start trying cases. 

I kept chambers here in Reno and had a 
courtroom at the courthouse on Booth Street. 
GSA remodeled some rooms on Booth Street 
so that I would have space. It was the fourth 
floor. 

I was with Judge George in Las Vegas and 
Judge Foley, and that was a critical time for 
our court because Judge Claiborne had taken 
a leave of absence. As a consequence, the 
caseload that Judge George and I confronted, 
and Judge Foley, was substantial. If I’m not 
mistaken, we were either first or second 
in terms of weighted cases per judge in 
the country at that time. I think we had 
somewhere in excess of seven or eight 


hundred cases assigned per judge during that 
period of time. 

I’ll never forget the first day I appeared 
in Las Vegas. Preston Bluett, who was the 
deputy clerk of court, had brought some 
current cases into my provisional chambers. 
I call it that because I had a small room in 
the corner down there. They didn’t have a 
chambers that I could occupy, and the cases 
were stacked halfway up to the ceiling, and 
those were just the cases that we were to try, 
not the motions and what have you that had 
to be decided. 

I know during the first eighteen months 
I was on the federal bench that I tried 
approximately fifty-five criminal jury trials, 
and of course, a number of motions and civil 
cases and civil trials in between that. On 
one occasion, I had three juries going at the 
same time. One was deliberating, one I was 
selecting, and I was in the middle of a third 
trial. Those were very difficult times for all of 
us. I know Judge George had a comparable 
caseload, so we were doing everything we 
could just to stay above water. 

Shortly after you were sworn in, I understand 
there was a meeting with Judge Thompson and 
Judge Reed and Judge George, maybe even 
Judge Foley, about what you were going to be 
handling. Was that all down in Las Vegas or 
did that happen up here, or do you recall? 

I know that we met. I can’t recall if we 
met in Las Vegas or in Reno, and I know we 
discussed the distribution of the caseload, and 
that’s when we just reformulated the plan that 
I’d been advised of earlier that my duty station 
would be in Las Vegas, and they basically 
confirmed that I would be able to handle a 
caseload in Reno, which enabled me to be 
in Reno on Fridays and Las Vegas Monday 
through Thursday. That’s the routine that I 



50 


Howard D. McKibben 


had then for about the first two years that I 
was on the federal bench. 

Did they simply give you Judge Claiborne’s 
caseload? 

No, I think we had a new draw I took a 
lot of those cases, but I took cases that some 
of the other judges had too. And of course, I 
took some cases from Reno for the calendar 
that I had on Fridays, and those came from the 
judges; it would have been Judge Thompson 
and Judge Reed in Reno. 

How did the judges in the district feel about the 
Judge Claiborne situation? 

It was a very difficult time. Our judges 
were, for the most part, pretty much insulated 
from any of the proceedings themselves. 
We were never interviewed about it. There 
was never any contact with the judiciary in 
connection with that matter, but we all sensed 
it. We knew that it was a difficult time for our 
district, and that’s one of the reasons that we 
had so many cases. It was so difficult for us to 
accommodate the attorneys on both the civil 
and criminal dockets in handling those cases, 
even though we were working nonstop on 
them. That was a period that we desperately 
needed new judgeships and we didn’t actually 
secure any new judgeships for a number of 
years after that. But that was the impact. 

In looking at that pile of cases that the deputy 
clerk brought in and stacked almost to the 
ceiling, what did you feel about that? 

I had considerable experience on the 
state bench trying cases while I was a state 
judge, and so I was ready to take those cases 
on immediately and to handle them. But the 
sheer volume of them was kind of depressing. 


I know there were times we had calendar 
calls where there were in excess of a hundred 
cases that were called on a given Monday 
for a two-week stack. When you have to go 
through a hundred cases, civil and criminal, 
on a two-week stack, you know it’s just going 
to be very difficult for the attorneys, for the 
members of the bar, for the bench to be able 
to accommodate everyone. We were able, 
over a period of time, to move through those 
cases and get it down to a manageable level, 
but it took Judge George and me, and to some 
extent Judge Foley, a considerable amount of 
time to do that. 

You had considerable experience as a judge 
coming into the federal system. I know that 
when other rookie judges come into the federal 
system, sometimes they’re assigned a mentor or 
someone else who they can confer with. Did you 
have anyone like that? 

I didn’t have a mentor, but Judge George 
and I developed a very close bond and he 
was of tremendous assistance to me in Las 
Vegas. Judge Foley was also of assistance to 
me, and when I was up here, of course, both 
Judge Reed and Judge Thompson were just 
wonderful. I think it would have been very, 
very difficult for me if I hadn’t had such 
wonderful colleagues to cope with the volume 
that we had the first two or three years. 

I’ll be eternally grateful to Judge George 
and Judge Foley and Judge Reed and Judge 
Thompson for the courteous way in which 
they introduced me to the federal court, 
assisted me, and all of them were wonderful 
mentors to me. And I think that has carried 
over, even today, with the collegiality we have 
on our bench. It is really a hallmark of this 
district with the wonderful spirit and feeling 
that we have among our federal judges of 
a collegial atmosphere and a willingness to 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


51 


share and to take cases and divide cases so that 
we keep a fairly balanced calendar among all 
of us. It’s just been one of the finest districts to 
serve as a federal judge, I think, of any place 
in the country 

You mentioned that one of the ways you dealt 
with this enormous caseload was to triple-set 
your cases. Had you ever done that before as 
a state judge? 

When I say triple-set, that was actual trials 
that we were in, but for that two-week stack, 
sometimes wed have a hundred cases. I’d just 
be trying three of them at the same time. I’d 
never done that as a state judge. We had the 
luxury, particularly toward the end of my 
term as a state judge, to set maybe one, two, 
or three cases on our stacked calendars, not 
a hundred. So it was a total sea change from 
the volume that I’d experienced before. And, 
the complexity of some of those cases made 
it even more difficult. 

Were there any special techniques or tricks that 
you developed or others told you about that you 
implemented to manage such a tremendous 
amount of work? 

I held a lot of hearings. I was almost 
continuously on the bench and I was able to 
dispose of many motions orally. I’d hear oral 
argument and then decide those from the 
bench, and to this day I continue to do that 
on a fairly regular basis. In addition, I tried to 
expedite the time periods and the cases that 
we tried, tried to constrain the attorneys to 
limited times without actually putting them 
on a clock. And I found that as long as we 
didn’t take excessive recesses and moved right 
along, it worked pretty well. 

Jurors have always been a particular love 
of mine. I’ve been very involved in the jury 


system, taught at the National Judicial College 
on jury issues and many other issues, but my 
particular focus has been on jury matters. 
So I would, in our jury trials, do everything 
I could to accommodate jurors and let them 
understand that I believed that they were the 
most important people in the courtroom. 
They are the finest goodwill ambassadors that 
the members of the judiciary and the bar have 
in our community. I wouldn’t waste their time, 
and if we don’t waste the jury’s time, we’re not 
wasting our time. I would take up motions 
at noontime or in the evening or early in the 
morning, and then we’d streamline the trial 
process so that we could try these cases in an 
expeditious way. It seemed to work fairly well. 
When attorneys would estimate that a trial 
was going to last four or five days, I knew that 
we’d probably be able to do that trial in a day 
and a half. 

Oh, that’s interesting. 

And that’s how we would move the 
calendar along. And it didn’t take long, I 
think, for the word to get around in the legal 
community that those cases were going to be 
tried in a day and a half. And when I said to 
have all of your witnesses available that first 
day, it wasn’t long before they always made 
sure they had all their witnesses available the 
first day, and we didn’t have any downtime 
and we could move along. And we’re still 
doing that. 

When you were suggesting to the attorneys 
that the case was going to take a lot less time 
than they were anticipating, did you find that 
there were settlements that suddenly came to 
the table? 

They knew the cases were going to go 
to trial, and once they knew that the cases 



52 


Howard D. McKibben 


were going to go to trial, they, in fact, did 
settle many of the cases. They knew that they 
wouldn’t get continuances and they knew 
that within a week or two we’d get to those 
cases if they were on our calendar, on our 
stacked calendar. So that, I think, encouraged 
settlement for the ones that were going to 
settle at some point because they had firm 
trial dates and we knew we’d get to them. And 
that helped clear our calendars considerably. 

I would think so. 

That they did. 

Were you also handling a lot of criminal 
matters? 

Yes. As I indicated, that first eighteen- 
month period, the two years, I think it was 
about fifty-five or fifty-six criminal jury trials 
that we had, each of us, both Judge George and 
I. And then we had the civil cases, in addition. 
There was a tremendous backlog of criminal 
cases and those had priority. We just dug in 
and got those cases disposed of as quickly and 
expeditiously and fairly as we possibly could. 

I think I read in an article about your 
confirmation and elevation to the federal 
bench that one of the first matters you held as 
a federal judge was a naturalization ceremony 
here in Reno. Do you recall that? 

I do. One of the most pleasant things we 
do on the federal bench is to preside over 
the naturalization proceedings. I always 
enjoyed adoption proceedings in the state 
court, and naturalization proceedings I 
consider to be something akin to the adoption 
proceedings because, in effect, as I tell those 
who are becoming new citizens of the United 
States, they’re being adopted by a wonderful 


country; and that they’ll have all of the great 
privileges and rights that a young child who’s 
adopted has in this country. And so it was a 
wonderful experience for me to preside over 
those ceremonies, which are so important to 
so many people and have an impact on our 
country in terms of the diversity that we have. 

Where was that held? Do you recall? 

It was in the ceremonial courtroom on 
Booth Street in Reno. 

Now, one of the early criminal matters that you 
handled involved a smuggling case, involved 
drugs. I believe it was close to two hundred 
pounds of cocaine had been brought into 
Las Vegas, and there was a conspiracy or an 
alleged conspiracy of six individuals from the 
Caribbean and Colombia, and a fellow named 
Barry Seal [phonetic] testified with immunity. 

Right. 

Do you recall that case? 

I do. It was one of the most fascinating 
cases I think I presided over in all the years 
I’ve been on the bench. Leo Moreno was the 
leader of the conspiracy that brought the 189 
pounds of cocaine from the Bolivian jungles 
to Las Vegas. As I recall, we started out with 
about eleven defendants in that case. I believe 
we ended up with seven defendants that were 
actually tried. One was the person who was 
the equivalent of the attorney general in the 
Turks and Caicos Islands. 

The reason the case was so fascinating 
was because of the extensive amount of drugs 
involved and the fact that Barry Seal, who had 
been, as I recall from the testimony, one of, if 
not the youngest pilot in the history of TWA 
to fly the 747s. He gave up his position with 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


53 


TWA to, in collaboration with his brother-in- 
law, import drugs from South America. 

We started the trial, as I recall, late one 
week—I think it was on a Friday—and 
because of testimony that was given that 
I found was prejudicial to the defense the 
first day of trial, I had to declare a mistrial. 
We then selected another jury the following 
Monday. There was quite a bit of publicity 
in the newspaper over the weekend about 
the trial and I was concerned whether we 
could get a fair jury. Surprisingly enough, 
we were able to select jurors, most of whom 
had no knowledge of the case. We’re always 
concerned about pretrial publicity, but for the 
most part, we find that there are many jurors 
that are selected, ultimately, that have not 
heard anything about the case through any 
form of the media. 

At that time, Barry Seal was in the 
government secret witness protection 
program. He had been in the program for 
some time because of the potential threats 
on his life. When he appeared and testified in 
court, he was guarded by at least ten federal 
marshals. When he testified—I rarely ask 
questions in criminal cases, but I did ask him 
a question. And I asked him, “Why did you 
do this?” 

And his response was, “For the thrill of 
it.” I was interested in why he would decide 
to run drugs when he had such a successful 
career as a pilot. And that was his response. 

My recollection is that they would bring 
the drugs up from South America in a small 
plane and fly over the Andes. There was 
fascinating testimony about how they almost 
lost the plane in the jungles, how they had 
trouble breathing when they got up at a 
certain altitude going over the Andes and had 
engine problems. 

The way they brought the drugs into the 
United States was to fly across the Gulf of 


Mexico at what they called the spray level, 
which was to bring their plane in so low that 
the spray from the water from the props 
would actually come up on the windshield. 
They did that so they could stay under the 
detection of the radar screen. Then when they 
got to where the oil derricks were, they would 
circle the derricks. When the blip came up 
on the radar screen, it would appear that it 
was a helicopter coming off the oil derricks. 
And then they’d come in and land without 
any suspicion. 

The drugs would be transferred from 
the small plane onto the jets that they had 
and then flown to different distribution 
points in the United States. And one of the 
distributions was in Las Vegas, and that’s 
how they were arrested here. We had two or 
three coffin-like Styrofoam containers in the 
courtroom that were filled with the cocaine. 

The defendants were convicted. Shortly 
after the trial, my understanding is that 
Barry Seal left the secret protection program. 
Within a short time after that, before he was 
to testify in a major drug case in Florida, 
he was gunned down in a parking lot in 
Louisiana and killed. 

So that was quite an interesting chapter 
in my tenure on the federal bench and a very 
fascinating case. There was a movie made 
of that particular criminal venture, and I 
think it was called Double-Crossed. It was a 
fascinating trial and it was a fascinating slice 
of life. 

Did the movie cover the trial or just the events? 

It mainly covered the events. There was a 
little bit about the trial, but nothing really that 
resembled the way the trail was conducted. 

I see. It’s interesting somehow how judges are 
portrayed in motion pictures. 



54 


Howard D. McKibben 


Fortunately, they didn’t depict me in any 
particular way in that one. [laughter] 

Obviously, you saw lots of cases in 1985. 
I believe there was a matter that involved 
the State of Nevada trying to enforce rules 
regarding the transportation via railroad of 
low-level nuclear waste into the state. Do you 
recall this matter coming before you? 

That was a case, I think, that involved the 
interaction of regulations between the two 
states, between the State of Nevada and one 
or more other states. I concluded in that case 
that under the Constitution, when there is 
an action between and among states, original 
jurisdiction of that case rests with the United 
States Supreme Court. So I transferred that 
action to the United States Supreme Court 
and they accepted jurisdiction. 

I must say that I was relieved that they did. 
You would hate to misread the Constitution 
and have the Supreme Court tell you when 
you’re a rookie on the bench that you’ve 
misread the Constitution and say, “Why are 
you transferring that case to us?” There aren’t 
many such actions where the Supreme Court 
has original jurisdiction but this was one of 
them, and fortunately, the Supreme Court 
took the case. 

That’s nice in a whole range of ways. It gets the 
case off your docket. 

It did. I had decided an important 
constitutional issue. The case was off my 
docket, and ultimately it was resolved, I think, 
through the appointment of a special master 
by the Supreme Court. 

Now, over the years, as I understand it, you 
have been involved in a Ninth Circuit committee 


regarding federal-state court relations. Is that 
right? 

I have. Maybe going back before that 
one, the Ninth Circuit committee that I 
was involved with actually was the jury 
committee, and I chaired the Ninth Circuit 
Jury Committee for several years. I was 
involved with it originally when I think it 
was chaired by Judge Enright of the Southern 
District of California. 

We, during that period of time, worked 
on the manuals that have been developed over 
the years for jury instructions, both civil and 
criminal, for the Ninth Circuit. One of the most 
significant projects we worked on, starting 
initially when Judge Enright was chair and 
later on when I chaired the committee was to 
develop a jury trial manual for district judges. 
That was a nuts-and-bolts type of manual on 
how you deal with recurring jury issues. It 
was very helpful for trial judges. I think all the 
judges in the Ninth Circuit have found it to be 
very helpful. In fact, it’s used in other circuits 
and, to this day, the committee continues to 
modify and update it. In addition, the two 
books that we have on civil and criminal jury 
instructions have been extremely helpful. 

It’s one of the most interesting and 
enjoyable committees that we have in the 
Ninth Circuit. 

Who else served with you on that committee 
besides Judge Enright? 

Judge Strand was on the committee 
at that time. I know when I was chair we 
had Judge Alice Marie Stotler, Judge Rudy 
Brewster, Judge Levy and Judge Alarcon. We 
had a number of really fine judges who made 
tremendous contributions. That was a very 
busy committee and we were very active and 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


55 


it took a great deal of time, but it was very 
rewarding. 

What are some of the common issues that come 
up with juries, and how do you address them? 

Issues about trial management; being able 
to move the trial along, accommodating the 
jurors, making sure that they are comfortable, 
not unduly taking their time, giving them 
preliminary instructions about what is 
expected of them. If you have a deadlocked 
jury, what type of instructions would you give 
to the jury? If you have to poll the jury, what 
type of questions do you ask them about, 
whether or not they have, in fact, reached a 
unanimous verdict? 

We tried to simplify the instructions that 
we provide to the juries so that they’re in lay 
terms. If it’s a complex conspiracy case, for 
example, how can we make those instructions 
simple and direct and clear so that jurors 
will understand them? These are the types 
of things that we were wrestling with all the 
time and designing the instructions around 
clear and intelligible elements for each type 
of offense or each type of claim in the civil 
case and the elements of the offenses in the 
criminal context. These were issues that we 
would update as the law changed over time. 

The federal-state committee that you’re 
talking about is something that I was 
appointed to by Chief Justice Rehnquist. 

Oh, it’s very recent. 

So it’s a recent thing. 

I see. Do you want to talk about that? 

Oh, I could talk about it. We discussed it 
briefly earlier. I recall when I received the call 


from Ralph Mecham, who was the director of 
the administrative office of the courts, asking 
if I’d serve on the Federal-State Jurisdiction 
Committee. I told him I was delighted to do so 
and I found it to be a very valuable experience. 
I served for five years on the committee with 
the last three as chair. 

We discussed issues of common concern 
among and between state judges and federal 
judges, particularly in the area of bankruptcy 
law and the effect that a stay from bankruptcy 
will have on the processing of cases in either 
state court or federal court; habeas cases; 
death penalty cases, which have a great impact 
both in the federal courts and state courts 
when you have post-conviction writs in 
federal court to consider, and the impact that 
it has on a pending death sentence in the state 
courts, and the remand of those cases to the 
state court, the preparation of transcripts, all 
of those are very, very important issues. The 
question of certification of legal issues to the 
state supreme court by the federal court; when 
should that be done? How should it be done? 
Is it an area generally that will impact the state 
so much that the state supreme court should 
decide it if it’s a diversity case and have the 
first opportunity to rule on the issue before 
the federal court would weigh in on it? 

Those are the types of things we looked at, 
and the sharing of information, the sharing 
of courtrooms. We, in fact, in Nevada have 
shared one of our federal courtrooms in Las 
Vegas for a substantial period of time with the 
state court when they didn’t have any facility 
for some major construction defect cases. 
And we’ve been able to work that out. It’s been 
a really enjoyable experience. 

I did mention to Ralph Mecham when he 
called on behalf of the Chief Justice and said 
the Chief Justice was going to appoint me to 
that position, would I accept it, and I said 



56 


Howard D. McKibben 


I would be happy to do so, but I said, “You 
understand, I’m taking senior status in another 
three or four months.” 

And he said, “Oh, I’m delighted to hear 
that because you’ll have more time to spend 
then on the committee.” So that didn’t deter 
him at all, but I’ve really enjoyed it and we’ve 
had some wonderful conferences. 

One of the things I enjoy most is the 
interaction that our judges have with the 
state supreme court justices. We had our first 
state-federal conference in Nevada when I was 
chief of our district court. It was a one-day 
conference with the justices of the Nevada 
Supreme Court, all the state district judges 
and all of the federal district judges, magistrate 
judges, and bankruptcy judges. 

We had a full day of discussion on some 
of these issues that I’m talking about, and it 
was very healthy discussion and a wonderful 
interchange. I’m hopeful that they’ll continue 
that in the years ahead. I think that type 
of dialogue is very important, a healthy 
relationship between the state and federal 
courts. Having been a state district judge and 
then on the federal bench this was important 
to me. In fact, the educational conference of 
the Ninth Circuit is going to have a session on 
federal-state relationships this January. 

Good. Thinking about this state-federal court 
relationship, in moving from the state court to 
the federal court, what differences did you see ? 
Obviously, the federal law is different, but .... 

One of the differences, of course, is 
that you have lifetime tenure on the federal 
bench, and you don’t have that on the state 
bench. You have to run for reelection. I was 
fortunate; I didn’t have an opponent. But there 
was always the possibility you would, and you 
had to attend functions and be ready to run a 
campaign if you had to. You don’t face that. I 


don’t think I’ve ever approached a case in the 
federal court any differently than I did the state 
court because of the fact that I have lifetime 
tenure. 

It certainly is a relief not to have to go out 
and collect money from bar organizations 
or attorneys. That gives you a comfort level 
that you didn’t have when you were running 
for reelection on the state bench. I think the 
framers of the Constitution were very wise 
when they created lifetime tenure for federal 
judges and insulated the federal bench from 
the political process. That is a very important 
part of the fabric of our government, and 
I think, over the years, it has proven to be 
very important that the federal judiciary is 
insulated from the political process. 

As a practical matter, were there different 
administrative procedures in state court versus 
federal court, the way the court should govern, 
the way just sort of the daily work went forward? 

As a federal judge, you’re appointed for a 
lifetime under the Constitution. And while the 
administrative office of the courts generally 
governs the courts nationwide, you have a 
hybrid system. You have the administrative 
office of the courts giving administrative 
support and the governance comes from the 
Judicial Conference of the United States. But 
you also have, then, the circuit council. It 
governs the circuits. Then each individual 
judge, of course, governs his or her own court. 

In the state system, we were elected. 
There wasn’t as much involvement in the 
administrative process in the state system as 
there is in the federal system. Although we had 
some interaction with the supreme court, we 
didn’t have the interaction, I think, or didn’t 
have at that time in the state, the interaction 
that we have with our circuit council and the 
conferences that we’ve had with the Ninth 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


57 


Circuit. There was more interaction with the 
bar associations when we were on the state 
bench than you have with the Federal Bar 
Association on the federal bench. 

I do find that you’re more isolated on the 
federal bench. When I came on the federal 
bench I went back for orientation with the 
Federal Judicial Center [FJC] in Washington. 
One of the judges there said, “Welcome to the 
monastery.” I didn’t know exactly what he 
meant at the time, but it dawned on me fairly 
soon thereafter that you are more insulated 
on the federal bench than you are on the 
state bench. You’re not campaigning. You’re 
not out attending all of the functions that you 
attended when you were on the state bench, 
and you don’t have the interaction with the 
members of the bar on the federal bench the 
way you did on the state bench. 

It’s probably a good thing in a way 
because of the lifetime tenure that you 
have on the federal bench. But I think it’s 
important for federal judges not to lose 
sight of the fact that they are members of 
the community and they need be a part of 
the community. I’ve attempted to do that 
over the years and participate in different 
types of events and activities so that we have 
a clear understanding of what’s going on in 
the community. Mary Ann and I both enjoy 
participating in community events. You can’t 
lose sight of that. 

The other thing that I was told at the time 
was that you should always comport yourself 
on the bench in a way that will bring credit to 
the bench and I have always tried to do that. I 
think that’s really good advice and, hopefully, 
I’ve been able to adhere to that over the years 
and I’ve always explained that to my law clerks 
when they join the chambers. 

In fact, one of the things that I show my 
law clerks when they start their clerkship is 
the book The Little Engine That Could. That 


was always one of my favorite books as a 
child and I thought it had a really important 
message for me when I was growing up. You 
can always be successful if you work hard at 
it and there will be good results if you have an 
outstanding work ethic. As long as you think 
you can do something and accomplish it and 
you put your mind to it, you probably can. So 
you reach for whatever dreams you have and, 
hopefully, you’ll be able to achieve those. But 
you shouldn’t give up, even though you may 
have little adversities on the path to whatever 
it is you’re trying to achieve. 

It’s nice. It’s nice. Thinking about that first year 
on the federal bench and that mountain of 
cases, did you ever have doubts that you might 
get through that or not? 

Oh, doubts always entered your mind. 
But as I say, fortunately, I had wonderful 
colleagues, and with their support and with 
the type of staff that we had with Carol 
Fitzgerald, who I thought was a marvelous 
clerk of the court, we were able to move 
through those cases. 

One of the other interesting cases I had 
was a case of the sky bandit who was a bank 
robber. I think this one might have been in 
1984. At least it started in 1984, right after 
I went on the bench. It was called the sky 
bandit trial or case because Marvin Rogers, 
who was defending himself in the case, had 
led a commando-like robbery of the Overton 
branch of Valley Bank outside of Las Vegas. 
They robbed the bank by taking a stolen 
aircraft and flying it into the small town of 
Overton. They commandeered the airport 
and tied up three workers and drove to the 
bank and robbed it of $114,000. 

Because of the unique nature of that set 
of facts, I had a number of motions on the 
admission of what we call 404(b) evidence, 



58 


Howard D. McKibben 


which relates to the admissibility of similar 
acts and conduct in other circumstances, and 
whether or not it can be used to show intent, 
absence of mistake, accident, or identity issues. 
The identity issue was an important issue 
in this case, and I ruled that prior evidence 
of similar bank robberies in Louisiana, in 
which Rogers had been charged, would not 
be admissible. But evidence of a robbery in 
a small town in Texas, which Rogers was 
involved in was admitted in our trial because 
it was very closely related to the circumstances 
of our case. There, they flew in on a helicopter 
and robbed the bank and then flew out; it was 
very unusual. He ultimately was convicted 
of the robbery but the circumstances of the 
robbery were quite unique. 

It is fascinating. I’m surprised there hasn’t been 
a movie made of that one. 

Exactly. 

You had a bankruptcy fraud case against an 
attorney by the name of Kirby Wells, I think, 
and this involved taking some testimony from a 
congressman, now senator, then Congressman 
Harry Reid. In this particular case, I understand 
that there was remote testimony. That is to say 
Congressman Reid was in one place, perhaps 
Washington, D.C., and he was going to testify in 
this case, perhaps by telephone. Tell me a little 
bit about your feelings about using technology 
of this sort in a trial. 

That may have been the first time we 
used technology to permit someone who 
was outside the area to appear either through 
videoconferencing or teleconferencing. 
I found it to be an extremely useful tool. 
Obviously, in a criminal case you have to be 
very careful about the use of such technology 
because of the right of a defendant to confront 


the witnesses. Senator Reid, the attorneys, 
and I felt the videoconference worked very 
well. 

I frequently hold teleconferences on 
motions. Many times there will be lawyers 
from Washington, D.C. or New York, or 
even, in districts such as ours, between Reno 
and Las Vegas joined telephonically for the 
hearing. Rather than incur the expense of the 
lawyers coming to Reno from distant areas. 
It’s easier and less expensive to hold non- 
evidentiary hearings, the motion hearings, 
by telephone, and it’s worked very well. 

We allocate a certain period of time. It’s 
done on the speaker system in the courtroom 
so that everyone in the courtroom can hear 
it. We publish and give notification to the 
public of the hearing so that the members of 
the public or the press can be present during 
the hearing. And if either side requests to 
be present for that hearing, then I won’t go 
forward unless the other side is there too. It 
just seems to me you need to keep everything 
even on the playing field. But it’s worked very 
well. 

We have had videoconferences in addition 
to that, not as often. The videoconferencing 
has worked quite well in connection with 
the prisoner litigation. Rather than bringing 
prisoners in from Ely or Elko, or from Carson 
City, we simply join them telephonically or by 
video. And it is of great benefit to the prison 
officials to not have to transport the prisoners 
here on cases involving writs of habeas corpus 
or 1983 claims. 

Through our pro se law clerks a number 
of years ago in prisoner litigation, we started 
an early case review of prisoner litigation. We 
were able to hold an early status conference, 
and we kind of pioneered this in the Ninth 
Circuit in our district. It’s been used as a 
model since then in other districts around 
the country. The prisoner would be joined 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


59 


telephonically early in the case and often 
times we could resolve the litigation by 
discussing claims and parties and sometimes 
the action itself. 

I spoke once at a conference of district 
judges about the process that we were using 
here. We were able to use the technology 
to have this early case conference with the 
prisoner to identify the critical issues that the 
prisoner was advancing in the 1983 case. And 
that was a very, very important tool that we 
used in helping to facilitate the disposition 
of those cases. 

It’s very interesting. You know the old saying 
“Justice delayed is justice denied.” You’re 
speeding up the process . .. 

Exactly. 

by using new technologies. 

And now when we hold all of our judges’ 
meetings that we have several times a year, they 
are also scheduled through videoconferencing 
in our judges’ conference room. And those 
judges that are unable to go to Las Vegas if 
the meeting’s being held in Las Vegas or come 
to Reno if the meeting’s in Reno, will join 
through the videoconferencing. It has worked 
extremely well and has been very beneficial 
to the judges. In this state it takes a half a day 
to travel to Las Vegas and to come back, and 
so it’s been a wonderful tool. 

Let me ask you a little bit about one of your 
colleagues. When you came on the federal 
bench, Judge Roger Foley was sitting in Las 
Vegas. Was he senior at that time? 

I believe he had just taken senior status. 
I think Judge George took his position, if I’m 
not mistaken. 


I think you’re right about that. 

So I believe that Judge Loley had taken 
senior status about six months before I 
came on the bench, because Judge George 
was sworn in about six months before I was 
sworn in during 1984. I think he was in the 
spring of 1984 and I was sworn in the fall of 
1984. 

Did you have much interaction with Judge 
Foley? 

I did. 

Tell me about it. 

Oh, it was fascinating. He was such an 
important part of our court. His father had 
been a United States district judge, and 
the entire Eoley family has done so much 
for the legal community in Las Vegas and 
throughout the state. He had a wealth of 
knowledge and was very kind and fatherly 
to me in sitting down and discussing the 
things that had to be done to successfully 
handle cases in federal court. I recall at my 
swearing-in, the formal investiture that 
we had in Las Vegas, that he hoped that I 
would always be able to judge with a “kind 
and gentle heart,” and I’ll always remember 
those words. He was a wonderful person and 
judge. 

That’s a nice phrase, kind and gentle heart. 

Right. 

I understand that when Judge Foley took senior 
status, he took issue with the expiration of a law 
exempting senior federal judges from paying 
Social Security taxes. As a consequence, he 
decided he wasn’t going to hear any more cases. 



60 


Howard D. McKibben 


My recollection of what happened was 
that Congress had determined that federal 
judges who were on senior status should be 
considered as, in effect, full-time employees, 
and as such, they were not retired. And since 
they weren’t retired, they wouldn’t be eligible 
to draw Social Security, even though they had 
a reduced caseload and they were on senior 
status. Of course, you have lifetime tenure 
as a judge, and since your salary cannot be 
reduced during your term in office, which is 
a lifetime, unless you resign from the bench, 
you’re entitled to receive that salary for the 
balance of your life. 

When Congress decided that senior 
judges should not be entitled to receive Social 
Security, it meant that judges, like Judge Foley, 
who had been working for nothing because 
they were entitled to that salary whether 
they worked or not, wrote a letter of protest. 
I think probably every senior judge in the 
United States signed that letter to Congress, 
indicating that if Congress did not repeal that 
act within a given period of time, that they 
would all discontinue drawing any cases. 

If my memory serves me correctly, within 
two weeks Congress repealed that act, and 
so up to the current day then, when you take 
senior status, you no longer pay into Social 
Security and you’re allowed to draw Social 
Security. I think the clear message that was 
given at that time by all of the senior judges is 
that we shouldn’t be penalized because we’re 
working to assist the courts at no additional 
compensation, and that’s basically what was 
happening. 

Congress, I think, in its wisdom, saw the 
value of what senior judges were doing for 
this country. Frankly, our system would be in 
dire straights if senior judges, who, in effect, 
are not given any additional compensation 
for what they do, would discontinue working. 
It’s been a very important part of the entire 


federal judicial process to have the senior 
judges. And that was the statement that the 
senior judges sent to Congress at that time. 
And Congress blinked, and properly so, and 
recognized the value of senior judges. 

Yes, indeed. Without the contribution of 
senior judges in districts all over the nation, 
American citizens and litigants would not 
be able to get fair and swift hearings of their 
cases. It seems to me the amount of work that 
senior judges contribute to the federal courts 
is enormous, and it’s costing the government 
nothing. 

The last figures I saw, I think between 
twenty and twenty-five percent of all 
cases handled in the federal courts in the 
United States are handled by senior judges. 
Those are judges that have every right to 
be fully retired and receiving the same 
compensation, whether they were retired or 
not. But, because of the love they have for the 
federal judicial system and for the work that 
they do as federal judges, they’ve elected to 
remain on the bench and draw a substantial 
caseload. Frankly, that’s what I’m doing now 
and I enjoy it a great deal. I’ve cut back some 
on my caseload so that I’ll have more time 
for my wife Mary Ann and my children Mark 
and Susan and our grandchildren, Elizabeth, 
Alex, Annabelle, and Zachary. It’s a nice 
balance. 

Now, you served as president of the Ninth 
Circuit District Judges Association. 

I was elected as president of the Ninth 
Circuit District Judges Association by the 
district judges of the Ninth Circuit at our 
conference. And as the representative of the 
Ninth Circuit district judges, I was honored 
to serve on the Ninth Circuit Council. It 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


61 


was during a period of time of rapid growth 
in the Ninth Circuit, and, of course, our 
primary concern involved issues relating to 
judgeships and salary, something that never 
seems to go away . . . 

That’s a perennial issue. 

and working with Congress on those issues. 
I felt honored to have had that opportunity 
to serve in that capacity 

Who was chief judge of the Ninth Circuit when 
you were serving? 

It was Judge Wallace, Judge Cliff Wallace, 
and he also was the chief judge during the 
period that I served as chair of the Ninth 
Circuit Jury Committee. Then I served with 
a number of other people on a national 
publication on jury techniques and the 
modernization of jury techniques, and I 
found that all very interesting. 

What was it like to work with Cliff Wallace? 

He was a tremendous administrator, 
very knowledgeable, and I just marveled at 
his organizational skills and his ability to 
manage the Ninth Circuit in a very capable 
way. I also was very impressed with his 
commitment to other countries and his 
involvement in the administration of some 
of the courts in the Pacific Islands and other 
areas in the Pacific. And he was one of the 
most energetic people I think I’ve ever met. 
He just had an abundance of energy, and I 
never could quite figure out how he found 
the time to do everything that he did. 

Approximately how long was your tenure? 

Three years. 


And what does that organization do? 

It looks at common problems that the 
district judges have in the circuit. As I say, 
the president is the representative of that 
association to the Ninth Circuit Council, and 
as a voting member of the council, of course, 
can express the views of the district judges. The 
chief judges would meet and, of course, they 
would provide input to us as representatives 
to the Ninth Circuit Council. I think that was 
probably the primary responsibility of the 
president of that association was to represent 
the association and the interests of the district 
judges on the Ninth Circuit Council. 

Do you recall what particular issues that the 
district judges were grappling with at that time? 

I think even back then there were issues 
being raised about the division of the Ninth 
Circuit and trying to voice some of the 
concerns on each side of the equation on that 
issue. We had continuous problems involving 
judicial vacancies and the need for additional 
judgeships; particularly for the fast-growing 
areas such as southern California and Nevada 
and Arizona. We were at the forefront of 
trying to secure an ear in Washington so 
that we could express our concerns about 
the desperate need that we had for new 
judgeships. 

Those are perennial problems, aren’t they? 

They are. 

Now with Senator Reid in a position of 
leadership in the majority and Congresswoman 
Pelosi, maybe we’ll get a clear hearing. 

They certainly have the interests of 
the west at heart. Senator Reid has been 



62 


Howard D. McKibben 


so helpful in Nevada with the two new 
courthouses that we have here, relatively 
new courthouses; the Lloyd George D. 
Courthouse in Las Vegas and the Bruce R. 
Thompson Courthouse in Reno. He also 
was instrumental in securing additional 
judgeships, the four new judgeships that we 
were able to secure in the last ten years in 
Nevada. I think without his extraordinary 
efforts, we wouldn’t have those judgeships or 
the courthouses. So, hopefully, he’ll be able 
to continue in those leadership positions and 
provide the needed judgeships throughout 
the Ninth Circuit. 

Speaking of the split, do you have a position 
on the Ninth Circuit? 

Basically, the judges of Nevada have not 
taken a formal position on it. I haven’t seen 
any plans that have been developed that I 
think are any better than what we have in 
place, and until I’m convinced that the circuit 
needs to be divided, I’m not a proponent of 
splitting the circuit. I think there’s going to 
be a point in time in the future where the 
Ninth Circuit is going to be so large that 
something’s going to have to be done. I don’t 
know that we’ve reached that point yet. But 
all of the plans I’ve seen for dividing the 
circuit will create a circuit which includes 
California, which will be so large anyway that 
I’m not sure a division makes a great deal of 
sense at this point in time. I haven’t taken a 
formal position one way or the other. 

I think it’s an issue that we’re all involved 
in and concerned about, but I think it’s an 
issue, basically, that has to be resolved by 
the Ninth Circuit itself, the judges of the 
Ninth Circuit. I think it’s an issue that will be 
discussed for some time. 

It’s a very deeply divisive political issue, 
unfortunately, and I wish it weren’t so. I 


probably, at this point, favor retention of 
the circuit as it is until I see some plan that 
would suggest to me they’re going to solve 
the problem that they’re citing, and that is the 
large caseload. 

One thing that I did notice as I served on 
the Ninth Circuit Council and in my capacity 
with the district judges association is that the 
Ninth Circuit has been very innovative in 
many of the programs that they’ve developed. 
They have created models of governance that 
have been used by other circuits throughout 
the country. I think if the circuit hadn’t been 
at the forefront of some of these innovations, 
then perhaps the calls for dividing the circuit 
would ring with more resonance. We are 
functioning fairly well now. 

Let’s turn to some of the cases that you handled 
early in your career on the federal bench. One 
in particular came along fairly early, about two 
years after you’d come onto the federal bench, 
and that was a kidnaping case involving a 
defendant named Sante Kimes. 

Yes. Actually, it was interesting because 
Sante Kimes had spent her early childhood 
in Carson City, Nevada. She married and 
moved to Hawaii and had a home in—I think 
it was in Honolulu. And the allegations and, 
ultimately, her conviction related to charges 
that she was harboring some maids who were, 
in effect, being held against their will at her 
home. In fact, they were locked in closets and 
kept there against their will for a substantial 
period. There was testimony that she, on 
occasion, would burn them with a hand iron 
and that they had bruises and marks on their 
body which reflected abuse. 

Ultimately, one of them escaped, and 
went to the authorities. Sante Kimes was 
charged with harboring these maids and 
having kidnapped them and taken them 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


63 


from, as I recall, the Las Vegas area. And that 
was the nexus to Nevada. It was alleged she 
also held them in her home in Las Vegas. 

As I recall, her husband entered a plea to 
lesser charges. She ultimately was convicted 
of several counts of violating the federal anti¬ 
slavery laws and she received the maximum 
sentence of five years under the statute. 

Subsequent to those trials, she was 
convicted of killing a New York socialite and 
a California businessman. She is now serving 
a life sentence. 

It certainly sounds that way, and it puzzles me 
when you get a husband and a wife who are 
involved in a crime and one pleads out. 

Right. 

I would think that would kind of be the 
handwriting on the wall. 

The plea agreement was favorable to 
him so he wouldn’t face a substantial prison 
sentence. 

It’s a high-profile case. It must have caused a 
lot of headlines. 

It’s detailed in a book called Son of a 
Grifter written by one of her sons, Kent 
Walker. 

One of the other early cases that I had 
involved wild horses. Did I talk about the 
wild horses? 

Oh, no. Tell me about the wild horses. I think 
you have to explain them, where the wild horses 
are and .... 

Wild horses roam the open ranges of 
northern Nevada. They’re in other states 
too, but there are thousands of them in 


northern Nevada. The Bureau of Land 
Management [BLM] had a management plan 
for the adoption of wild horses. Congress 
has provided for the adoption of wild horses. 
It’s necessary to control the numbers on 
the ranges because if they overpopulate the 
range there is insufficient food and water to 
sustain the horses and cattle. There has to be 
a reasonable management program in place. 

And they have no real natural predators. 

They don’t. That’s right—the case that we 
heard, which was back in .. . 1988. 

What are you looking at? 

This is a copy of Sports Illustrated, April 
25, 1988. Mohammed Ah is on the cover. 
Even though I had competed in track and 
other sports when I was young the only way 
I ended up in Sports Illustrated was through 
the wild horse case. The article was entitled 
“Bad Times for Wild Horses.” Part of the 
article related to Bureau of Land Management 
programs that permitted mass adoption of 
the wild horses. The horses would be held for 
slaughter and ultimately slaughtered. 

I held in my decision in 1988 that such 
mass adoption was contrary to the intent of 
the statute, and ordered the BLM to withhold 
title from any adopter who expressed an intent 
to exploit the horses, that is, to sell them for 
slaughter and bucking stock in rodeos. The 
BLM had admitted that, on several occasions, 
it knew before granting title that the adopters 
intended to slaughter the horses. Basically, 
what I wrote in the decision, among other 
things, was that the BLM seemed to believe it 
was obligated by some unwritten requirement 
to pass title, even if it knew of an adopter’s 
intent to exploit the horses. I held that such a 
position defied logic and common sense and 



64 


Howard D. McKibben 


was contrary to legislative intent. The concept 
of adoption is to have in place a program, 
which places the horses where they will be 
nurtured and treated humanely 

As a consequence of that ruling, the BLM 
revised their regulations and discontinued 
the mass adoption program. It also devised a 
system by which a person who was purchasing 
the horses had to certify that they would not 
be slaughtering the animals. If they conveyed 
titles to others, they also had to execute an 
affidavit that they wouldn’t be slaughtering 
the animals. 

Did you get any mail about this? 

I did get some mail about that. 

Really? 

I get mail frequently on cases that involve 
tax protesters, but I didn’t get a lot of mail on 
that one. 

I would think that the animal-rights folks and 
the environmentalists would be very pleased 
with your decision in that case. 

I think they probably were. 

On the other hand, the meat processors 
probably were not too happy. 

I just couldn’t understand how they 
could call it an adoption program, because 
an adoption program is one that’s designed 
to provide love and affection for the adoptee, 
and that was just contrary to what was going 
on in that particular program. 

All kinds of interesting cases arise out of 
Nevada’s gaming laws and other situations 


that not necessarily would arise in other 
jurisdictions. 

One of the intriguing cases I had was 
actually when I was on the state bench. The 
defendants were yo-yoing the slot machines. 
They would take a quarter and wrap a fishing 
wire around it. That way they could put it 
down in the machine and pull it back up and 
put it back. So they’d only use one quarter 
until they hit the jackpot. 

Because there’s a lot of hotels and resorts in 
the state, the unions are very strong here too. I 
recall that in 1987, or maybe 1986, the culinary 
workers went on strike and you had a kind of 
an involvement in the arbitration. 

Right. As I recall, there was a strike for 
back wages, which I ultimately upheld, and it 
was a major issue that ultimately resolved the 
strike. The culinary workers were very strong 
in Las Vegas and Reno, but principally in Las 
Vegas during that period of time. I did hold 
that they were entitled to the back wages. 

I think it was about that time that the 
government uncovered a scheme that had 
been used by Ben Schmooty and Joseph 
Cusamano, who were union bosses of the 
culinary union. They were convicted of 
conspiracy to skim some $315,000 from a 
union life insurance policy in the 1980s. That 
was a major setback to the culinary union in 
terms of the fraud involved, and it was quite 
extensive. 

That can be devastating to a union to have the 
leadership involved in corruption and then 
subsequently convicted of it. 

Yes, and all of that was occurring at about 
the same time. That’s true. 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


65 


You had another case involving a misapplication 
in bank funds in a check-kiting scheme, where 
one of the defendants was a man named Jack 
Urich [phonetic], and it also involved the 
Mineral Bank vice president, a Mr. Fenner 
[phonetic]. You’d better explain who Jerry 
Tarkanian was. 

Yes, he was the basketball coach for the 
University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and he 
coached some very talented basketball players. 
He put together just a wonderful basketball 
team. They won the NCAA title once and I 
think came in second the next year. But he 
had a running battle with the NCAA over 
regulations and reporting and things of that 
nature. 

The case that I was involved with related 
to an effort by the legislature of the State of 
Nevada to adopt certain due-process rules 
that would apply to any investigation by the 
NCAA. I ruled that was unconstitutional, that 
the states didn’t have the authority to impose 
those special rules and procedures on NCAA 
investigations. That decision ultimately was 
upheld by the Ninth Circuit and the U.S. 
Supreme Court denied cert. It was a difficult 
case. 

And with the state legislature getting involved 
to try and change these regulations on a state 
level, they would have been applied nationally. 
It’s a political problem, as well. 

That’s right, and it did have some 
substantial ramifications involving the rights 
and authority of the NCAA. And of course, 
this was a challenge to the rights of the NCAA 
to conduct these investigations. Those who 
belong to the NCAA sign agreements that they 
will be bound by the regulations of the NCAA 
to voluntarily participate in the investigations. 


Oh, yes. Have you had any other cases while 
you’ve been on the federal bench involving the 
mafia? 

I really didn’t. I know Judge George had 
one that involved the Spilotro brothers. They 
declared a mistrial part way through the trial 
and then, before the government was able 
to retry them, the Spilotros were killed and 
buried in a cornfield in Indiana, south of 
Chicago. I was there at the courthouse at the 
time. The issue that resulted in the mistrial 
related to alleged jury tampering. 

Federal judges are very independent 
individuals, partly as a result of having lifetime 
tenure, but partly I think it’s a personality 
kind of thing too. I think the job tends to 
attract people who are very self-motivated 
and independent. Thinking about that and 
thinking about how you do have to work with 
other judges on your court in the district, do 
you get together regularly here in Reno and 
talk about common issues or any things besides 
court business? 

We do. Probably one of the most wonderful 
aspects of my job has been my good fortune 
to serve as a district judge in the district of 
Nevada. My colleagues have been wonderful, 
not only mentors, but sounding boards on 
issues that are of common interest to all of us 
in this district. And the collegial atmosphere 
in this district has been outstanding. 

As I have described before, we have 
district meetings. We normally have those at 
least four times a year, where we meet twice 
in Reno and twice in Las Vegas, and then 
we also have our district conference. It’s a 
chance for us to get together and talk about 
common administrative problems we have 
throughout the district. And on top of that, 



66 


Howard D. McKibben 


we will discuss, generally, legal issues that are 
of common interest to all of us. 

It’s just been a pleasure to work with all 
of my colleagues and I think that’s probably 
been one of the most enjoyable aspects of my 
work on the bench; to work with the talented 
and capable people that we have on the bench 
here. It’s just a joy. 

When there’s a situation such as the jury 
tampering case or the jury-tampering situation 
that ultimately ended in the mistrial in Las 
Vegas under Judge George, do other judges 
come to you with those kinds of issue to talk 
about how to deal with them? 

We normally will discuss matters like that 
in a hypothetical setting, not specific advice 
on any given case. But in terms of the general 
proposition of law, there are occasions where 
we’ll discuss those issues. 

Sometimes being a federal district judge 
can be a lonely job. It is helpful to be able to 
consult with other judges you respect in a 
general context about those issues. 

One advantage a circuit judge has is that 
the judge will be sitting with at least two 
other circuit judges, and so they have that 
interchange. As a district judge, you make the 
call yourself, and other than the advice you 
may get from law clerks, it can be a little bit 
lonely. So it is helpful to be able to at least run 
general issues of law past your colleagues. 

I’m sure you’ve heard the other side of it, too, 
that sometimes the circuit judges complain that 
they have to listen to two other people. 

[laughs] There is that downside, I guess. 
I once said that the definition of a circuit 
judge is a judge who sits high on the hill 
watching the battle as it unfolds in the valley 


below. When the battle is over, the circuit 
judge slowly steps out from the behind the 
rock, descends the hill, and shoots all the 
wounded. And I think I told that once. As a 
matter of fact, I think I was at a Ninth Circuit 
conference, and I told that joke. And I’ll never 
forget, Judge Joseph Sneed came up to me 
afterwards and said, “Judge McKibben, I really 
enjoyed that story, but at least occasionally, we 
resurrect the dead.” That was funny. 

Oh, I love it. I love it. That’s great. One of the 
things that you and your colleagues on the 
district court in Nevada attempted to do in 
the 1990s was add some judges to the court 
to get you some new colleagues, some more 
colleagues. 

Right. We really worked hard in the 
1990s, all the way from the early 1990s up 
through the late part of the 1990s, in securing 
additional judgeships, and that was during 
a period when Congress was not approving 
very many judgeships. They had omnibus 
bills, but they weren’t passing those bills. We 
went for a period of time when I came on the 
bench in 1984 until—and I’d have to check the 
figures on this, but I think it was from 1984 
until 1999 before we got new judgeships in 
Nevada. 

We had the two new additional judgeships 
and we had worked very closely with our 
congressional representatives. But it was a 
national issue; it wasn’t just focused here. 
Finally, during the period I served as chief 
judge, we were able to convince Congress 
that we needed those judgeships, and with the 
help of Senator Reid and Senator Bryan and 
others, we were able to secure those additional 
judgeships. But up until that point in time, we 
had eight, nine hundred cases per judge and it 
was a life change when we got the additional 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


67 


judgeships here in Nevada. It just made it so 
much easier for all of us. 

I’m sure it must have been. What sorts of steps 
did you and your colleagues take to encourage 
Congress to act? 

We prepared the studies that established 
the caseload that we had. We had demographics 
in terms of how rapidly Nevada was growing in 
comparison to other states in the Ninth Circuit 
and other states throughout the country. We 
compiled that information. We sent it back to 
our senators and representatives. We enlisted 
the assistance of the bar associations, and they 
were very, very supportive in making the case 
for us, that coupled with the support of the 
Ninth Circuit Council and others in the Ninth 
Circuit was very helpful. 

They finally recognized the need here 
and in Arizona and southern California for 
these additional judgeships, so it was long 
overdue. We were finally able to prevail and 
now we have a caseload that’s comparable to 
the caseload of other judges throughout the 
country as a result of the new judgeships we 
secured. 

Did you and your colleagues work at all with 
the Chief Justice and the Judicial Conference of 
the United States? 

We did, and the conference was very, very 
supportive of the position we took on the need 
for the additional judgeships. I would say, while 
I was chief judge, the single most important 
accomplishment that we had in our district 
was to secure those additional judgeships. Even 
though we were able to dispose of the cases 
fairly expeditiously, it was very, very difficult. 
And once we got the new positions for this 
district, it made it much easier for the judges to 


accomplish a stable calendar without having to 
have the civil cases wait many, many months to 
be tried while we devoted our time principally 
to the criminal cases. 

Before you got in the new judgeships in the 
district, were there any changes in the way that 
the court used magistrates? 

We’ve always used magistrate judges for 
the early case management in civil cases and, 
to some degree, in Las Vegas on the criminal 
cases. We also have allowed, for many years, 
the magistrate judges to be on the wheel, and 
by that I mean that they were able to, if the 
parties consented, to try civil cases, including 
a jury trial. 

A number of districts in the country do 
not permit that, but we have a fine cadre 
of magistrate judges. We have the greatest 
confidence in them. We always have. All the 
district judges have great confidence in the 
magistrate judges’ ability to handle these cases, 
and it’s been a very successful program. We’ve 
used our magistrate judges, I think, as well as 
anyone in the country. One other district I 
think of is Oregon that has a great utilization 
program for their magistrate judges, similar 
to what we have here. 

And that basically just takes a change in the 
local rules to ... . 

It does. We, by local rules, would provide 
for magistrate judges, through consent of the 
parties, to handle the civil cases all the way 
through trial. 

In 1989, the United States celebrated the 
bicen tennial of the judiciary. 

Right. 



68 


Howard D. McKibben 


And you played a role here in Nevada in that. 

We did. We had a mock trial and it was 
a trial that involved a celebration of the 
bicentennial of the Constitution. We had 
students from the various schools here in 
our courtroom. As I recall, we had a video 
hookup with Washington in connection with 
the programs that they had there, and it was 
very successful. 

One of the things I’ve enjoyed a great 
deal, both when I was on the state bench 
and on the federal bench, is to have students 
from high schools and from the elementary 
schools come over to the courtroom, and I’ll 
speak with them about issues of law and the 
legal process. 

In addition, we have mock trials and, 
matter of fact, they’re going to be conducting 
some here toward the end of March and first 
part of April. They’re also going to have the 
state competition here. It’s really enjoyable 
to preside over those cases and watch the 
young students get enthused about the law. 
They are very talented. 

One thing that I have always stressed with 
my law clerks is that—and I do this when I 
bring the classes over from the elementary 
schools, and I actually go to the elementary 
schools and talk with young people—is how 
important it is to have young people in our 
society understand our system of justice, 
understand what lawyers do, understand 
what judges do. I think it has a wonderful 
ripple effect in terms of their confidence in 
the judicial system in the future. 

Whenever I talk with the elementary 
students, I talk about the book I mentioned 
before that I enjoyed when I was young. 
It’s called The Little Engine that Could. As 
a matter of fact, I have a copy of the book 
over here. Through perseverance and 


commitment and energy and being goal 
directed, you can actually achieve things that 
you think you can’t. 

When you couple that with the robe 
and the gavel and wig that I show the young 
students, I think it has a positive impact on 
the feelings that they have about the judiciary 
and our system of justice. I encourage my 
colleagues and everyone to engage in that 
type of activity because I think it’s a very 
positive thing for the judiciary and for the 
legal community as a whole. And it is a great 
deal of fun. I recall on one occasion when 
I was visiting a kindergarten class, I asked 
the students if they knew the President who 
appointed me. One student asked, “Was it 
President George Washington?” I smiled 
and said I wasn’t quite that old. Then a girl 
raised her hand and said, “Was it Abraham 
Lincoln?” I smiled again and said no but 
you are getting warmer and I am getting 
younger. 

There was another trial reenactment, not just 
a mock trial, but a trial reenactment that you 
participated in down in Genoa. 

Oh yes. That was the hanging tree, was it? 
Curse of the hanging tree. 

The curse of the hanging tree, right. It 
involved a brawl and a killing in the Genoa 
Bar, which is the oldest bar in Nevada, in 
Genoa. And within a two-day period, the 
defendant was tried and convicted and 
hanged at the hanging tree, which still stands 
in front of the old courthouse in Genoa. I 
played two parts. I participated twice. Once I 
was the judge during the trial, and the second 
time, I was the defendant and they hanged 
me on a limb of the tree. I was hoping that 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


69 


they had it rigged properly and fortunately 
they did. But I was apprehensive until it was 
over. 

They actually went through . .. 

They actually have you there .... 
the action? 

Yes, you’re on a horse, and then the horse 
leaves and you come down. 

My robe, a robe that I used when I was 
on the state bench, still adorns the judge that 
you see at the museum at the old courthouse 
in Genoa. 

Oh, really? [laughs] 

So if you’re ever there, you can go in and 
see it. 

I’ve been there not so long... in fact, I think the 
last trip I was up here, I went by there. 

I haven’t been there for a long time, but I 
assume the judge is still there. And if so, that 
robe is my robe, [laughs] 

The mannequin? Oh, my goodness. I had no 
idea. That’s interesting. And Nevada Supreme 
Court Justice Noel Manoukian was involved 
in that too. 

That’s right. He was. Right. He served 
as a judge several years, too, and I think the 
year that I was convicted of that crime, Noel 
Manoukian, former justice of the supreme 
court, was the presiding judge. 

Is this something they do every year, this 
reenactment? 


They have done it, or at least during 
that period of time, they were doing it every 
year. Whether they still do it or not, I’m not 
sure. I know every so often they do have that 
reenactment. 

My goodness. So what’s it like to be on the 
wrong end of the noose? [laughs] 

I do not want to do it again, I’ll say that, 
[laughter] 

Let’s see. It was in 2000 that the Lloyd 
George Courthouse opened in—what was the 
year? One of the other significant things that 
we did administratively here was work on the 
development of the design for the Bruce R. 
Thompson Courthouse here in Reno. I don’t 
know if I spoke about that or not. 

No, why don’t you talk a little bit about that. 

Yes. I was going to go back here just for a 
second and see if I can see when we opened. 
I think we’ve been in here about eleven years. 

Opened in 1996. 

Ninety-six, during the early and mid part 
of the 1990s and for some time prior to that, 
we knew we needed a new courthouse in 
Reno, and the question was whether we would 
expand the existing courthouse on Booth 
Street or find another site. And I know all of 
the judges of our court, particularly Judge 
Hug and Judge Brunetti of the Ninth Circuit, 
were very helpful to our court, along with our 
congressional representatives, in securing a 
site downtown. This was going to be a core 
area for redevelopment of the downtown. 

Ultimately, the decision was made by the 
General Services Administration, GSA, to 
move the courthouse from the Booth Street 



70 


Howard D. McKibben 


location to the downtown location. Then 
we worked with the design people. If you 
see our courtroom, you’ll see that inside we 
have some globes that hang down. They give 
the courtrooms an antique appearance, even 
though the wood and the courtrooms are 
somewhat modern. 

We’ve really enjoyed this courthouse. It’s 
been very functional. I think it’s a beautifully 
designed courthouse and it has served the 
needs of our court, the bar, and the public 
here very well. We’re reaching the point now 
where, if we had an additional judgeship, we 
wouldn’t have courtrooms for them. And 
even though this design was supposed to 
take care of the needs of our court for the 
next twenty years, it looks like it’s going to fall 
short by about ten years because of the need 
for additional space for other judges when 
Judge Hicks, for example, goes senior. If Judge 
Hagen had stayed with our court—he retired 
a year and a half ago, but if he had stayed with 
our court, we wouldn’t have had space for that 
additional judge. So within a ten-year period, 
we’re practically out of room here, and at some 
point they’ll have to build an annex to this 
building. We’re already starting to talk about 
what should be done on that. 

Then, of course, while I was chief judge 
in 2000, we opened the Lloyd George U.S. 
Courthouse in Las Vegas. So within a period 
of four years, we had two new courthouses, 
one in Las Vegas and one in Reno, which 
is really quite extraordinary if someone 
understands how difficult it is to build these 
courthouses. And again, that was through 
the extraordinary efforts of our congressional 
delegation. 

It’s a very long and time-consuming process. 

It is. From the time that you start the 
initial request, it can take as many as ten 


or twelve years before you secure all of the 
approvals and construction is completed, and 
that’s if you are on a relatively fast track. 

Yes, I think the judges in the Central District of 
California are well aware of this issue. 

And the costs just escalate at a very rapid 
pace if you aren’t able to build out. By the time 
that you’re ready to get bids, the cost may be 
almost prohibitive and you have to go back 
and redesign. That’s what they’re finding out 
in the Central District of California. I think 
they’re talking in terms of—what is it, almost 
a billion dollars for that building now? It’s 
incredible. 

Something like that. It’s unbelievable. Was there 
a particular judge or judges from the court that 
were assigned the responsibility of overseeing 
the designs of these courthouses ? 

I was the chief judge during the period 
of the design work and construction of the 
Lloyd George Courthouse in Las Vegas. And 
of course, Judge George, after whom the 
building was named, was intimately involved 
in everything from the initial development of 
the prospectus and the development of the 
plans and what have you. Judge Pro was also 
quite involved in that whole process, and I 
was involved. I was much more intimately 
involved in the oversight of the development 
of the courthouse here in Reno, and during 
that period of time, Judge Reed, Judge Hug, 
Judge Brunetti, and Judge Hagen, to some 
degree, were involved in all of the work and 
the oversight responsibility of the courthouse 
here. 

I have a historical question for you and I don’t 
know whether you’ll know the answer or not. 
I don’t, and that’s why I’m going to ask the 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


71 


question. It was the practice for the federal 
government for many years, from the late 
nineteenth century through really up until 
about World War II, when they built a federal 
building in a town like Reno or Carson City 
or some other town, the building would be an 
all-purpose building. Primarily, it would be a 
post office with a courtroom upstairs. 

Right. They had that in Las Vegas and they 
also had it in Carson City 

Was that ever the case here that you know of, 
in Reno? 

Not in Reno, because the court moved 
from Carson City to the courthouse on Booth 
Street. Before that, the federal courthouse was 
situated in Carson City. I know Judge Ross 
presided for many years there as the only 
federal judge in the northern part of the state 
and that’s where his courtroom was located. 

I see. So that beautiful post office down the 
street has always been a post office and never 
a courthouse? 

To the best of my knowledge, I don’t think 
it’s ever been a courthouse. 

I was just curious. I was just curious. Let’s 
turn back .... Coming back to federal crimes 
and cases. In 1994, tell me if you remember 
this case. It involved a San Francisco attorney, 
Patrick Hallinan, who was accused of money 
laundering on behalf of a drug smuggler. Does 
this ring any bells? 

It does. It was a major case that we 
handled here. There had been a companion 
case earlier. Cyril Mancuso, who was one of 
the persons involved in the drug conspiracy, 
and that case had been tried before Judge 


Reed. The case that I had involved Cyril 
Mancuso’s attorney, Patrick Hallinan, who 
was a prominent attorney in the Bay Area. He 
had been charged with money laundering for 
Cyril Mancuso, who was, at that time, a Lake 
Tahoe developer who had been involved in 
the drug smuggling. 

Ultimately, the case did go to a jury. 
I dismissed some of the charges, but the 
remaining charges went to the jury and the 
jury didn’t deliberate too long. They found 
Mr. Hallinan not guilty. 

It was a very difficult case. It was a difficult 
case to try. John Keeker was the attorney 
for Patrick Hallinan. He also had been the 
attorney for Oliver North and was one of the 
most capable attorneys I think I’ve ever seen 
in the courtroom in the criminal context. His 
offices are in San Francisco. 

What made him good, do you think? 

He had a wonderful ability to retain facts. 
He could present very persuasive arguments 
to the jury. He was just exceptionally skillful 
in cross-examining witnesses. That’s one of 
the enjoyable aspects of being a federal judge, 
you see lawyers from not only this state, but 
across the country. 

The other attorney that I can think of that 
would be in that category would be Albert 
Kreiger, who appeared before me in Las Vegas. 
Those two attorneys are the two from the 
outside the area who are exceptional defense 
attorneys. 

That’s very interesting. I want to ask you about 
one last case today, and it involves a trademark 
infringement of a group that called themselves 
the Flying Elvises. Do you recall this? 

I do. They would jump out of helicopters. 
They dressed up like Elvis. They didn’t have 



72 


Howard D. McKibben 


the right to the trademark, so I ultimately 
enjoined them from engaging in that activity. 
But we had photographs of them and some of 
them looked just like Elvis but most of them 
didn’t really do justice to the clothes that they 
were wearing. 

One remark you made, in discussing some of 
the things that happened while you were chief 
judge, was that you felt that the single most 
important accomplishment for you as chief 
judge in the district of Nevada was acquiring 
two new judgeships. 

I think that’s right. Up until that point 
in time, we had one of the largest, if not the 
largest, caseload per judge in the country. I 
think we were second in the country. Each 
of our judges was carrying approximately 
seven hundred cases, which was more than 
twice the national average. We had felt, prior 
to that time, when Judge George was chief 
judge and then when I became chief judge, 
that one of the critical things that we needed 
to do administratively was to work with our 
congressional delegation and try to secure 
additional judgeships for Nevada. 

Statistically, we all knew that we needed the 
judges. It was just a question of when Congress, 
and Congress rather sparingly passes these 
omnibus bills that create new judgeships, 
would recognize the need and provide the 
assistance. All of our representatives, Senator 
Reid and Senator Bryan at the time, and the 
others, were very cooperative, and, ultimately, 
I think it was a testament to their concerns 
about our district that we were able to get 
that legislation passed and secure the new 
judgeships. And that helped tremendously. 

Ultimately, we had, I think, three new 
judgeships, and with the addition of those 
judges, our caseload, while it was still 
substantially above the national average, was 


something that was more manageable. We 
were very fortunate to have our congressional 
representatives working hard with us. 

I can still remember discussions that I had 
on the telephone with Senator Reid. It was 
coming right down to the wire in terms of 
justifying those judgeships. I took a number 
of calls from his staff, and once I remember 
talking with his staff and with him when I was 
over in Sacramento and they were putting the 
final touches on the bill. We went right down 
to the wire. But fortunately, we obtained those 
judgeships and it certainly was a healthy thing 
for our district. 

Who did you succeed as chief judge? 

Judge George. 

Judge Lloyd George. 

He left everything in wonderful shape for 
me. He had interests in budgetary matters, 
like I did. Some of my early training had been 
in program performance budgeting when 
I was securing a master’s degree in public 
administration and working in Saginaw, 
Michigan. I was very aware of the budgetary 
needs that we had for our district and was 
quite involved in the construction of the Lloyd 
D. George Courthouse in Las Vegas, which 
was another wonderful accomplishment for 
our district, to have the two buildings, the 
Bruce R. Thompson Courthouse in Reno 
and the one in Las Vegas. When you look at 
other districts, we’ve been very fortunate to 
have these new facilities and they’ve served 
us very well. 

Judge George left everything in really 
wonderful condition for me. It was an easy 
transition, and working with all of our judges 
made it very easy, because we have a very 
collegial group of judges, always have. Never 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


73 


had any real difficulties. They were wonderful 
in terms of letting me make many of the 
decisions that had to be made except for the 
major policy decisions. I made certain that 
all those issues went to all the judges so they 
could pass on the policy questions. That was 
my management style to try and not bother 
them with the details and the minor things, 
but to take all the major policy decisions 
to them in terms of budget, personnel case 
management, and other major issues. 

Sometimes being a chief judge, at least the 
stories I’ve heard in other districts, reminds 
you of being—and I don’t know if I mentioned 
this earlier—reminds you of being a caretaker 
in a cemetery. You’re over a lot of people, but 
nobody’s listening. Fortunately, my colleagues 
here in this district listened, I think, very well 
and they were very responsive and they made 
wonderful contributions, so it made my job 
just an incredibly easy job. 

It sounds like an easy transition. 

It was. It really was. I found that I would 
devote an hour, or sometimes two hours, 
a day to administrative matters, whether it 
was working with the budget, working with 
personnel, planning the programs that we 
were going to have, working on the district 
conference. I immersed myself into all of these 
issues. So it did take from your courtroom 
responsibilities and required extra hours, but 
I found it very rewarding. 

Describe briefly for me, if you would, what 
program performance budgeting is. 

That’s where you try to identify the 
programs that you think are most essential 
for your district or for your state or for your 
community. Then, by identifying those 
programs that are most critical to your 
district, you try to funnel as much of the assets 
that you have into developing those programs 


as priorities. It’s much harder to do that in 
the judicial context than it is, for example, in 
a city. In a city you can quantify programs, 
whether they’re parks and recreation, or 
traffic or other programs. Trying to adapt 
that to our system was relatively difficult 
because about eighty-five to ninety percent of 
our budget is personnel and the judges have 
set routines. Their program is set because it’s 
dispensing justice and handling the cases that 
come before us. We had limited capability of 
developing programs. 

An example would be to ask the judges 
how much they want to spend on technology. 
That would be an identifiable program. Find 
out what are the new trends in technology 
and how much money we want to allocate 
to that versus educational programs and 
things of that nature. We did have some 
discretionary spending within the system 
if you set aside the personnel aspect of it. 
We tried to quantify those things as best we 
could so that the judges could make choices 
on what was most important to operate the 
courts. 

How much local control is there in a district 
court with respect to the budget? 

Some years ago, before I became chief 
judge, the administrative office approved a 
decentralized program, where X amount of 
money is allocated to the districts. I found 
that very beneficial. Prior to that time, a 
great deal of the funding was controlled by 
Washington in the administrative office. This 
way we could help define our own programs 
and determine how much money would be 
spent on these programs. That’s why, with the 
type of funding that we had, we were able to 
sit down and develop these goals and then 
allocate monies to accomplish the objectives 
that we developed. 



74 


Howard D. McKibben 


We still had certain things that we had 
to look to Washington for in connection 
with choices between developing our own, 
say, technology program or going to the 
one that was being developed on a national 
basis. Ultimately, we elected to go on the 
national system with electronic filing and case 
management. But that was a policy decision 
that the court had to make, and I think they 
made the right decision on that. There were 
programs like that which we tried to develop 
over the years, and fortunately, we didn’t 
have a lot of internal controversies over those 
matters. 

Besides e-filing and that kind of thing, do you 
recall what other policy issues that you took to 
your colleagues on the court as a whole? 

We had to discuss chambers, staffing 
requirements. We had to discuss questions 
involving the development of long-range 
planning for our district. When Judge George 
was the chief judge, he assigned me as chair 
of long-range planning. We developed a 
long-range plan for our district that projected 
out how many judges wed need, depending 
upon the population of the state and what we 
anticipated would be the caseload, and what 
we would need in order to accommodate that 
in terms of number of judges and space. 

Space and facilities have always been 
a major problem in this district and other 
districts. One of the things we had to try to 
determine was how many chambers we were 
going to need in the future for senior judges. 
How do we plan for that now because those 
facilities aren’t going to be constructed for at 
least ten years? We were projecting into the 
future like that. 

That consumed a great deal of our time 
when we were constructing the Lloyd D. 
George Courthouse in Las Vegas, the space 


there and the fact that we had to allocate 
room where the U.S. Attorney’s office is. We 
knew from about the year 2011 forward, that 
we were going to have six judges take senior 
status within a three-year period. That’s 
almost unheard of. How do you accommodate 
those senior judges and accommodate the 
new judges that are going to be coming on 
board? We started projecting that out when 
I was chief judge and trying to secure space 
to accommodate the judges in Las Vegas and 
Reno. We tried to see if GSA would acquire 
property next to the building here so that 
we’d be able to expand here when we needed 
to. Unfortunately, GSA had a policy that they 
couldn’t buy property until they actually 
had the need. It would have been a good 
opportunity to buy at low prices, but it was 
contrary to their policy. Those were the issues 
we were dealing with. 

In conducting this long-range planning, was 
this all done internally with the court or did 
you bring in outside experts to help you? 

We brought in outside experts from— 
well, one outside expert from Washington, 
who was with the administrative office of the 
courts in their long-range planning division. 
He was very helpful to our whole process. 

We had a number of meetings and then we 
developed the long-range plan for the district 
of Nevada. I think we probably developed that 
in the early part of the 1990s, and we’d brush 
it off every so often and take a look at it. And 
like many districts, if they do have a long- 
range plan, or the circuit, if it has a long-range 
plan, we look to it as a guide. But sometimes 
perhaps we’re not as faithful in following it as 
we should be. 

A lot of what you put in a long-range plan 
is educated guesswork. It contains general 
concepts of what you want to do and what 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


75 


your mission is and the objectives that you 
have. But in the area of the judiciary, it’s 
much harder to define what your goals are, 
other than to dispense justice and to provide 
a forum for the fair and efficient and effective 
and impartial resolution of disputes. That 
makes long-range planning more difficult, 
I think, in the judiciary than in some other 
fields. 

Did you take into account the tremendous 
population growth that’s been occurring in 
the state? 

We did. We knew that was going to be 
a major problem. If you look at some of the 
southwestern states, Arizona, and Nevada 
have been just exploding population-wise. 
And not only that, we knew that there were 
going to be immigration cases. Illegal reentry 
cases dominate our docket now, which they 
didn’t ten, fifteen years ago. That has an 
impact on how you allocate your time and 
resources. It has an impact on pretrial services 
and on probation. And of course, we were 
responsible for all of those offices, and that 
was quite a challenge for us. But I have to 
say, with the addition of the new judges and 
the space and facilities that we have available 
now, I think all of our judges have been equal 
to the task. 

Is there a method for projecting caseload 
increase based on the demographics of a 
particular region? 

Right, and we’ve used statistics out of 
Washington to give us a barometer on that. 
We’re separated geographically by almost five 
hundred miles between Las Vegas and Reno. 
Our judges have faithfully, over the years, 
equally divided the caseload, the criminal and 
civil caseload, among all the judges. And if 


that means judges from Reno periodically go 
to Las Vegas to hear cases to take a portion of 
the caseload in Las Vegas, that’s what we do. 

One other thing that we have done 
faithfully over the years, and I was very keen 
on this as a chief judge, was to maintain 
the balance of parity among the judges. 
Periodically, whether it was every year or 
every couple of years, maybe even every six 
months, we’d review the caseload statistics. If 
it looked like there was an imbalance and one 
judge was falling behind for whatever reasons, 
it could have been in a protracted trial that 
lasted six or eight months, then we would 
redistribute the cases on a fair basis so that 
we continued to keep, within fairly narrow 
parameters, an equal balance of cases among 
all the judges. That way it didn’t end up that 
one judge had three hundred cases; another 
judge had one hundred cases. I suppose that 
penalized a judge that was very efficient, but 
in our case, it really wasn’t a problem because 
all of our judges have been very conscientious, 
and it made it fairly easy. And when we did 
redistribute, we didn’t have to redistribute 
that many cases. But we try to keep those in 
balance, so we would look at that all the time. 
I thought that was important. 

What was the biggest change that you 
experienced in your professional work on 
becoming chief judge? 

I think it was just the balance that you had 
to draw and the time constraints. I would meet 
with the clerk of our court, Lance Wilson, 
who did an excellent job and continues to 
do an excellent job for us. We would have 
discussions maybe for a half an hour, forty- 
five minutes almost every morning. You 
had to sandwich those in among your trials. 
Then we would have a number of meetings 
on both personnel matters. You don’t realize 



76 


Howard D. McKibben 


until you become chief judge that there are a 
lot of personnel matters you have to deal with. 
I tried to deal with those as much as I could 
without involving the other judges, unless it 
was absolutely necessary I think they were 
delighted that I did that. But those were very 
time-consuming. So I would say probably 
balancing your time was the most challenging 
thing for me. 

In some districts, it might be being able to 
secure a concurrence and a consensus among 
the judges, but I didn’t have any problem with 
that. My main concern was how do you balance 
continuing to take a full caseload, which I 
did—I didn’t diminish my caseload, and be 
able to do the administrative things. The one 
perk that we did get was an extra law clerk. I 
was happy to have that, but I really didn’t assign 
my law clerk to too many of the administrative 
issues. I basically handled that. 

Then you have the additional responsibilities 
of representing the district and giving talks 
and appearing at functions and what have 
you. I thought that was important to carry 
the message of the court to the community, 
wherever it may be, and the schools and other 
places in the community so the public, and not 
just the bar, would have an understanding and 
appreciation of our system of justice and our 
court. 

When you became chief judge, was there a 
committee structure for the court? 

There was. Judge George had developed 
some committees. I expanded that. I expanded 
the number of meetings of the court that we had 
a year, I think, from two to four. We alternated 
those meetings between Las Vegas and Reno. 
They were held in a fashion similar to what 
Judge George had done. We would receive 
reports from the heads of all the departments 
and then the judges would meet separately 


to discuss issues of common concern for the 
district. I designated various judges of our 
court to chair these. They were committees on 
case management, the budget, and technology. 
I chaired the budget committee. We had a 
committee on security, which Judge George 
was assigned to chair. 

I found case management and the case 
management committee to be very important, 
because we were always trying to implement 
new programs in the district that would assist 
judges in handling their cases more effectively 
and efficiently. I recall a number of years ago 
we developed, which was, I know, a model 
nationally, at least as far as the administrative 
office was concerned or the F JC was concerned, 
for triage hearings in prisoner cases. We 
would have early case review of those cases. 
The prisoner was present telephonically, the 
attorney general was present, and the j udge was 
present. We would go over the complaint. If it 
contained multiple parties and multiple claims, 
we tried to streamline that and dismiss as 
many parties and claims as could be eliminated 
early on so that the case became much more 
manageable. It was early case review by the 
judge, and that really helped on the huge 
backlog of prisoner cases that we had. 

In fact, now there is a committee in our 
district that’s looking at that old model that 
we had, trying to re-institute some of those 
concepts and develop some new techniques. 
We still, in our district and elsewhere, face a 
substantial number of these pro se cases, both 
prisoner and non-prisoner pro se cases. It’s a 
large percentage of cases. We were able to get 
a lot of the backlog of cases out when we did 
the triage hearings and I’m hopeful that will 
occur again. 

That leads me to ask you about on the civil side, 
the district’s procedures for case settlement and 
case conferencing. 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


77 


Right. One of the things that all of 
our judges, all of our district judges have 
been very clear about is that we have great 
confidence in the magistrate judges in our 
district. We have assigned considerable 
responsibilities to the magistrate judges, 
including settlement conferences. In fact, 
even though our magistrate judges are not 
on the wheel, we have a consent form that’s 
given to all the parties in civil cases. They can 
consent to have the case heard and decided 
by a magistrate judge. We have a number of 
consents that are entered into by the parties. 
That has relieved some of the caseload of the 
district judges. We particularly are grateful 
for that when we have a large number of 
criminal cases, which can’t be assigned, other 
than pretrial matters, to the magistrate judges. 
Dispositive motions would still have to come 
to the district judge, as well as the trial, in 
criminal cases, but they’ve been very helpful 
on the consent cases. They’ve been helpful on 
pretrial matters, and we utilize our magistrate 
judges to the maximum extent and consider 
them to be a very vital part of our court. 

You mentioned that the magistrate judges are 
not on the wheel. 

What I mean by that is they don’t actually 
take a draw of civil cases. I think the district 
of Oregon may do that, or at least I know 
they have in the past. We’ve given some 
consideration to that, but we think the 
consent system that we have in place works 
quite effectively. It does give some option to 
the bar in making the decision whether or 
not to have a magistrate judge or the district 
judge hear the case. 

Now, the district judge, of course, could, 
even if the parties consent, decide to retain 
the case. But, by and large, if there has been 
a consent, then it will be referred to the 


magistrate judge to try the entire proceeding. 
And by wheel, it means they simply are on the 
draw, given a percentage of cases, and they 
consider them just as the district judge would. 

I see. Now, before you became chief judge, 
you served on a number of Ninth Circuit 
committees and taskforces. 

Right. 

Were there any special committees that you 
served on as a consequence of becoming chief 
judge? 

I don’t think that I served on any particular 
committees. I do know that I would attend 
the conferences of chief judges, and I think I 
already spoke about the jury committee? 

Yes, you did. 

I think we talked about all those earlier. It 
was right after I had taken senior status that 
I got the call that Chief Justice Rehnquist 
wanted me to serve on the Federal-State 
Jurisdiction Committee, and, ultimately, 
chair that committee. I just retired from here 
that committee last year. I found the work 
fascinating. It was a tremendous amount of 
work, but there was a tremendous degree of 
satisfaction from working on that committee 
too. 

Tell me a little bit more about that, about the 
Federal-State. ... 

It was a nice fit for me because I had 
served as a state judge, as you know. And 
then, having been on the federal bench, I 
had a perspective from both sides. So when 
the chief justice asked if I would first serve 
on the Federal-State Jurisdiction Committee, 



78 


Howard D. McKibben 


and after having served for a year, asked if I 
would chair the committee, I was delighted 
to do so and I served on that committee for 
four years. 

We had four chief justices from around 
the country on that committee. We had four 
district judges. We had four circuit judges. 
We had a magistrate judge and a bankruptcy 
judge. So we had a great cross-representation 
of both the federal and state systems. I had 
an opportunity twice a year to attend the 
Conference of Chief Justices. In turn, they had 
an opportunity to provide considerable input 
to us on matters that affected federal-state 
relationships, and I had served for some time 
on our federal-state committee here internally 
and was very actively involved in that. 

Examples of things we did: I testified 
before the Senate Judiciary Committee 
on reforms to the habeas corpus laws. The 
legislation was designed to try to streamline 
and expedite the process of resolving the 
habeas cases. Some of those cases can take 
a considerable period of time in the federal 
court. 

The theory behind the Powell Commission 
recommendation a number of years ago 
in streamlining the habeas field and the 
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty 
Act was to enable one fair and full hearing 
of a state death penalty conviction. From 
time to time wed get mired down in a lot of 
procedural issues involving those cases. The 
case would be remanded to state court. Then 
it can be in state court for many, many years. 
Some of those cases are ten, fifteen years old, 
and Congress was concerned about that. And 
I had to respond to those questions when I 
appeared before the Judiciary Committee. 

As a result of that, the conference is 
looking at ways in which we can streamline 
the process for considering those cases, which 
will tie in with case management. That’s an 


ongoing process, but it was one of the things 
that was of interest to state judges, as well as 
the federal judges. When the case is remanded 
to the state court, the federal court stays the 
action. We therefore have a keen interest in 
having it resolved as timely as possible and 
have records available from the state court 
that can be transferred to the federal court 
expeditiously. So there was a lot of that give 
and take. 

We considered issues involving whether 
federal judges should serve on state juries 
and whether state judges should serve on 
federal juries. Under existing federal law, state 
judges are exempt from service on federal 
juries. I didn’t know that until I was on this 
committee and that issue arose. But federal 
judges are called from time to time to serve 
on state juries. The question was should there 
be some reciprocity there, and we were able 
to resolve that without additional legislation, 
just with the interchange that we had with the 
state judges. 

But these were issues that were common 
to both the state and the federal courts, and 
that’s why I found it so fascinating. It was just 
a wonderful experience. 

It was a tremendous amount of work. 
Maybe twenty to thirty percent of my time 
would be spent on matters that involved 
the committee when we were going back to 
the judicial conference and I had to make 
statements at the conference, or when we 
were going before Congress and I testified on 
Social Security. That was another major issue 
that arose involving the changes in Social 
Security. The proposed legislation would have 
eliminated the appeals council and could 
have resulted in an additional 60,000 cases a 
year coming into the federal courts. We were 
able to convince the Commissioner of Social 
Security ultimately that the right to a review 
administratively should not be eliminated 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


79 


before a case came into federal court. We 
were successful, and the state judges were 
also interested in that because it would have 
some effect on caseload, generally, with the 
administrative judges in the state process. It 
was a wonderful experience for me during 
that period of time. I enjoyed it a great deal. 

That sounds really interesting, especially given 
your personal background. 

Right. They had the national conference 
in Florida a number of years ago, and then 
they’ve had two western regional conferences 
on state-federal relationships. Both Nevada 
and California have continued to have very 
strong internal state-federal councils that are 
staffed. We receive a considerable amount 
of assistance, fortunately, from the circuit in 
connection with those councils. 

Speaking of the circuit and speaking nationally 
about the federal judiciary, about this time or, 
if I’m not mistaken, during the period you were 
chief judge, there was a review of local rules 
throughout the district courts to see if they were 
in compliance with federal legislation. Do you 
recall that review? 

I do recall it. That was assigned to our 
rules committee. We were constantly vigilant 
to make sure that our local rules were in 
conformity with the federal rules, and to 
ensure that our specialized rules didn’t violate 
the federal rules in some way. So we had a 
complete and comprehensive review of all 
our local rules to make sure they were in 
compliance with the fairly substantial changes 
that were made in the federal rules. 

Our judges were very concerned about 
delay in the disposition of cases. We wanted to 
be certain that our local rules had reasonable 
limitations on discovery, whether it related 


to the number of interrogatories, the length 
of depositions, and how you can incorporate 
that into the trial process. 

We were constantly looking for ways that 
we would assure that the cost of litigation 
wouldn’t escalate beyond reason and that 
time constraints could be managed effectively. 
We were always aware that this had to be 
accomplished within a reasonable scale and 
with a fair balance. 

When it came time for you to step down as 
chief, how did you decide that it was time? 

I had pretty much pre-planned that, 
because you can project out. You don’t 
become chief because you’re the wisest among 
wise people. You become chief because the 
statute states that your time is now because of 
your age and your years of service. It’s based 
strictly on seniority, and that takes a lot of 
the mystery out of it. And when you project 
out with the other judges on your court, you 
can see whether or not they will become 
chief if the current chief serves the full seven 
years. You’re allowed to be chief judge for 
seven years and I could have served for seven 
years, but I projected out that if I served my 
full seven years and then if Judge Pro, who 
was going to succeed me, served seven years, 
Judge Hunt, a very capable judge on our court, 
could not become chief judge because of his 
age. 

Because he would have exceeded.... 

You have to become chief judge before 
you turn sixty-five and you cannot serve 
as chief judge after you’re seventy, and you 
can only serve for seven years. Those are the 
conditions. I felt if I served for five years and if 
Judge Pro served for approximately five years 
or a little bit more, then Judge Hunt could 



80 


Howard D. McKibben 


still serve as chief judge. And that’s what was 
accomplished. I thought it was the fair thing 
to do because I think everyone should have 
an opportunity who possibly can to serve as 
chief judge. I think five years is about right. It 
was right for me. I enjoyed it, but I think it’s 
nice to share these things and to bring other 
perspectives to the position and the court. I 
didn’t have any regrets at all when I stepped 
down as the chief. 

I wanted to ask you about a case you had—I 
believe it was in 1998—about a defendant 
named Alvero Calambro, who was accused of 
the murder of two U-Haul workers in Reno. 

Right. That was one of the cases that was 
what would be described as a volunteer case, 
in which Mr. Calambro indicated that he 
wanted to forego all of his appellate rights 
and any rights that he would have for habeas 
review after his conviction of capital murder 
in state court. Of course, a petition was filed 
on his behalf here in federal court. When the 
defendant in a case such as this declines to 
proceed, a “next friend” could file a petition 
on his behalf. But in order for the “next 
friend” to have standing to proceed, the court 
must decide whether or not the defendant is 
competent to waive his rights to file a habeas 
petition or to seek further appellate review. 

I conducted a hearing on that. Before I 
did so, however, I appointed a psychiatrist to 
examine the defendant and provide a report 
to the court on whether or not the defendant 
knew what he was doing, that he could form 
a rational decision as to whether or not he 
competently was waiving his rights to any 
type of review, and whether he understood 
the consequences of it, which would be the 
imposition of the death penalty imposed by 
the state court. 


I secured that report and then we 
conducted a hearing on the competency 
issue. After that hearing, I concluded that he 
was competent to make an informed decision, 
that he understood what the consequences 
were. I examined him at great length and I 
concluded that he was competent, and so 
I denied the petition, which had been filed 
on his behalf by, I believe it was a relative of 
his. As a consequence, the death penalty was 
imposed and he was executed. 

Difficult case. 

Death penalty cases are very difficult. 
I have elected, as a senior judge, to decline 
to hear death penalty cases. That’s the only 
type of case on the wheel that I’m not taking 
anymore. 

A different sort of case occurred about the 
same time, very high profile, involving a man, 
a defendant by the name of Joe Conforte and his 
establishment known as the Mustang Ranch. 

He was named in a criminal complaint. 
AGE Corporation and Shirley Colletti 
were the defendants actually tried on the 
indictment. Mr. Conforte was a fugitive 
on another case and had been out of the 
country for many years. He didn’t appear 
in connection with the trial. He wasn’t tried 
in absentia, but the other two were tried in 
connection with the charges involving the use 
of monies through the Mustang Ranch. 

Ultimately, the Internal Revenue Service 
seized the Mustang Ranch and then, in 
proceedings before this court, I ordered the 
closure of the Mustang Ranch. It ultimately 
was sold. As I recall, there was an application 
made by the Internal Revenue Service to 
operate the ranch for a period of time. I 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


81 


rejected that request, believing that was 
not the appropriate thing for the federal 
government to be doing. I didn’t think it 
was an appropriate way for the IRS to be 
generating income to pay off the debt, so I 
didn’t permit them to operate the business 
and they ended up selling it. 

Just to be clear, the Mustang Ranch was a legal 
brothel in. . . . 

That’s right. 

Was it Storey County? 

Yes, Storey County. 

Right. And was this a tax-evasion case or a 
money-laundering case? 

The case involved the payment of taxes 
by these individuals and how they structured 
those payments. Again, what I will do, though, 
is go back and actually pull a little more 
information about that for the next time that 
we talk. I’ll make a note to be sure to do that. 

My notes indicate that there was possible juror 
misconduct in this matter. We can clarify that, 
I guess. 

Yes, there was an issue that arose 
afterwards that one of the jurors actually 
knew one of the people involved in the case 
and the juror hadn’t disclosed it at the time 
that she was selected on the jury. I conducted 
one of those rare post trial hearings where I 
asked the juror afterwards whether or not she 
had been influenced in any way by virtue of 
this relationship and also questioned the other 
jurors. The juror said that she had failed to 
make that disclosure and it was unintentional 


and that it didn’t affect her decision and hadn’t 
impacted anybody else. 

I concluded that it was not something 
that affected the trial in any way. That case 
ultimately was affirmed on appeal. I’ve 
only had maybe four or five cases where 
I’ve actually called jurors back to court to 
determine whether some external influence 
tainted the jury process. If it’s external to the 
jury process, then we can consider that. If it’s 
something internal to the process, you can’t. 

For example, there’s a Supreme Court 
case where the jurors had marijuana in the 
jury room during deliberations. The Supreme 
Court held that was internal to the process 
and, therefore, you couldn’t impeach the 
verdict. But if, for example, the jurors went 
out and independently secured information 
about the evidence in the trial and brought 
that back or had access to that, that is external 
to the process and is called extrinsic evidence. 
That conduct could well be a basis for granting 
a new trial. 

Interesting. Very interesting. And an interesting 
procedural case occurred in your district in 1999 
involving criminal aliens who had been ordered 
deported, and the issue, I guess, was whether or 
not they could be kept indefinitely in jail if their 
native country refused to accept them. 

That was a case our court felt was 
significant enough that we should hold an 
en banc hearing with all of our judges sitting. 
The Reno judges were in court here. The Las 
Vegas judges were in court in Las Vegas. We 
had a video connection and we decided that 
case en banc. It’s the only time that I’m aware 
of that this court has ever sat en banc to decide 
a case. 

There were several similar cases on file. 
Each judge had a number of these cases, and 



82 


Howard D. McKibben 


there was a timing issue involved. We had to 
decide these cases quickly. We felt the most 
expeditious way to deal with that would be to 
have all the judges hear the common issues 
and then render an opinion as quickly as 
possible, and that’s what we did. I think the 
decision came out within a week of our en 
banc hearing. That decision was affirmed by 
the court of appeals. 

I don’t think it’s a procedure that we’d 
follow often. I think it would have to be 
limited to that very unusual case where timing 
was critical, where a number of the judges had 
identical issues in cases that impacted a fairly 
substantial portion of our calendar, and that 
the most judicious way to deal with it would 
be to have all the judges sit en banc to consider 
it. We concluded that we could do so, but it 
wasn’t challenged. And so I think we would 
use that procedure sparingly. So far we haven’t 
had a similar en banc hearing. 

So thinking about thisprocedurally, the litigants 
presented their arguments before the judges, 
some of whom were here in Reno, some who 
were in Las Vegas. 

Right. 

Was there testimony taken at the time? 

No, it was strictly oral argument, which 
made it easy. 

And then when that was over, did the district 
judges meet in conference? 

We met in conference and assigned two of 
the judges to circulate an opinion. Ultimately, 
we were able to craft an opinion that all the 
judges signed. 

It’s fascinating. 


It was. 

Unusual. I have a note here about a case that 
happened in 2000, moving on, involving an 
African-American police officer from Sparks. 
His name was Melvin Gentry, I believe. 

And that was a discrimination case, as I 
recall. 

Does this ring any bells for you? 

It does. It was a very hotly contested case 
involving the Sparks Police Department. 
The issue was whether Mr. Gentry was being 
discriminated against on the basis of his 
race. I think it consumed about ten days. My 
recollection is that the jury deadlocked. We 
were ready to retry it, and the parties resolved 
the case the second time around and we didn’t 
have to retry it. I’m always delighted when the 
parties resolve their disputes without having 
to try a case a second time. 

Sure. Well into your term as chief judge, 9/11 
occurred, the attack on the World Trade 
Center and the Pentagon and the aircraft over 
Pennsylvania in 2001. What impact did the 
terrorist attacks have on the court? 

It had a major impact. I’ll never forget, 
I was sitting in court in San Diego as a 
visiting judge when that occurred. I turned 
the television on that morning just before 
I went over to the courthouse and I saw 
this horrific incident. It was unbelievable. 
I went to the court and I talked with Judge 
Marilyn Huff, who was the chief judge in the 
Southern District of California at the time. 
We discussed whether we should close the 
courts. 

Shortly after that discussion, I called the 
clerk of our court and had a conference call 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


83 


with our judges. We decided that we should 
close our court for the day until we could fully 
understand what was happening nationally 
Did it impact the courts? Was this threat an 
ongoing threat to the citizens and to members 
of the community? 

Then I had to try to determine out how I 
could get back to Reno as quickly as possible. 
The flights had all been canceled, but I did 
have a rental car. I contacted the rental agency 
and they allowed me to drive the car to Reno 
without any additional charge. 

I immediately drove to Reno and arrived 
about eleven o’clock at night. We were able to 
determine that there was no apparent security 
threat to our court so we opened court the 
next day. 

But the long-term changes were fairly 
profound in terms of security. We had 
heightened security almost immediately. 
How people are screened coming into the 
courthouses changed radically. The screening 
of employees, the screening of judges changed 
dramatically. The security systems that were 
put in place to prevent people from being 
able to come down ramps into the courthouse 
all changed and additional security was 
provided. 

Court security officers ? 

Yes, the CSOs, court security officers. 
And that, to this day, has really changed 
how we conduct our court-related business. 
Everyone is much more concerned about 
security issues. We’ve always been concerned 
about security, but we focused mainly on the 
potential problems with a disgruntled litigant 
not some external force that might target a 
courthouse. 

Yes, I think so. It changed our entire society in 
that regard, I think. 


It did. My recollection was that the 
judicial conference was holding a meeting in 
Washington, D.C. when this happened. The 
Chief Justice adjourned the session, and then 
there was a question of how they could safely 
exit the Supreme Court. Nobody knew what 
building might be the next target. It was a very 
frightening period in our nation. 

Yes, it was. Yes, it was. As you mentioned, more 
often in the past, there have been concerns 
about individuals threatening judges and 
you’ve had that situation, which we’ve talked 
about in the past. But in 2002, I believe you 
tried someone who was accused of plotting the 
murder of a district judge, Rosalyn Silver. Do 
you recall that case? 

Yes. I really can’t talk about the merits 
of the case because I think there’s an aspect 
of that that could still be on appeal, but that 
was a case in which Mr. Stewart was charged 
with having attempted to hire another to kill 
a federal district judge in Arizona. All the 
judges in Arizona recused and I received a 
call from the circuit to see if I would try that 
case, and I did. It lasted about eight days. He 
was convicted on those charges. 

That was a very difficult case, and I know 
it was a difficult case for the jurors. There 
were many issues on whether the defendant 
would represent himself or be represented 
by counsel. He ultimately asked for legal 
representation but there were issues that I had 
to explore and decide on self-representation. 

Of course. A very different kind of case occurred 
in 2003, and it probably wouldn’t have even 
been in my notes if it didn’t involve . . . 2003, 
there was a case involving a celebrity, a 
performer by the name of David Copperfield, 
and I believe he sued his insurance company, 
the Fireman’s Fund for breach of contract. 



84 


Howard D. McKibben 


That was an interesting case. That was a 
case in which David Copperfield sued the 
insurance company under his policy for 
what was referred to as lost property He 
had entered into a contract to perform his 
magic show in Russia at several venues, the 
last of which was to be in Moscow. It was to 
be performed on a Sunday afternoon and 
the mayor of Moscow and a number of other 
dignitaries were going to be there. 

The testimony showed that an 
organization, which was known as Ris LisS 
Corporation, which was reported to be linked 
to the Russian mafia, was involved in the 
contract with Copperfield. This organization 
decided they wouldn’t make the last payment 
that Copperfield believed they owed him. So 
he indicated that the performance in Moscow 
wouldn’t go on. They insisted that it would. 
Ultimately, Copperfield was given the money 
to perform the magic show. 

The next morning when he was getting 
ready to leave, the Carnet papers required 
to move Copperfield’s props and equipment 
out of the country disappeared, and it 
wasn’t magic. These papers permitted Mr. 
Copperfield to transport more than four 
million dollars worth of equipment necessary 
for his illusions in and out of Russia without 
paying taxes or duties. Since Ris LisS had 
reluctantly paid him the last payment, they 
decided to hold his property in Russia until 
he repaid the money that had been paid for 
that last show. 

Mr. Copperfield left the country and 
returned to the U.S. His equipment remained 
in Moscow in a warehouse. Finally, he paid 
back the money and the equipment was 
released. He then sued the insurance company 
on the grounds that the property was lost 
property. 

Ultimately, the jury found against 
Copperfield on his claims and entered a 


defense verdict. It was an intriguing tale of 
what happens in Russia. 

Sounds interesting. 

It was. 

Lots of interesting issues there. 

One thing we do find in our district is that 
there are a number of noteworthy people that 
end up in our court. I know Judge Foley had 
a case a number of years ago that involved 
Rodney Dangerfield. That was a case in which 
he apparently singed his eyes while he was in 
a steam room at one of the hotels. It got hotter 
than it should have. He felt the injury to his 
eyes would affect his ability to perform. 

I’ve asked you about a lot of cases over the 
course of our interviews. Is there any particular 
case that I haven’t asked you about that you 
would like to talk about? 

I don’t know if we’ve spoken about the 
water cases in Nevada, the Truckee River 
Irrigation District, the decrees on the Truckee 
River and the Carson Rivers. I don’t know if 
we’ve talked about that. 

No. Tell me about those. 

One of the significant cases involved 
recoupment of waters that were allegedly 
over-diverted by the TruckeeCarson Irrigation 
District. Congress enacted legislation 
authorizing the government to move forward 
to try to recoup water that allegedly was over¬ 
diverted. The people with an interest in that, 
were the United States, the Pyramid Lake 
Paiute Tribe, the TruckeeCarson Irrigation 
District, which represented the ranchers in 
Fallon, and others who had some collateral 



Reflections as a Federal Judge 


85 


interest. The question was whether or not 
there were over-diversions, and if so, what 
was the amount of over-diversion of water to 
the TruckeeCarson Irrigation District to the 
detriment of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Indians. 

Ultimately, I decided there had been an 
over diversion of apparently 200,000 acre- 
feet of water which should be restored to the 
tribe at Pyramid Lake. And, I set in place a 
structure for recoupment of that water. As I 
say, those issues are on appeal now. 

The trial involved thousands of exhibits; 
it involved numerous parties, and I believe 
that we were in trial for maybe six or seven 
weeks. It felt longer. It was so protracted that 
my family actually gave me a large gavel, 
which is about twenty times the size of a 
regular gavel, so I could take it to court to 
keep order and keep the case moving along. 
The first day I appeared in court with that 
gavel, the attorneys were very humble and 
very responsive to all the concerns that I had 
about the speed at which we were moving. 
The gavel got their attention. I have proudly 
displayed it in my chambers on top of my 
stand-up desk, and if I ever have the need, I’ll 
take it back into court again. 

That’s great. As a famous Nevada resident once 
said, Mark Twain, “In the West, whiskey’s for 
drinking and water’s for fighting.” 

That’s right. I’ve heard that. I like that one. 

Are there other cases that stand out in your 
mind? Thinking back over your career, it’s been 
long, both as a practicing attorney and now on 
the state bench and on the federal bench. What 
advice would you give to a young person who 
is considering a career in the law ? 

I think it’s a wonderful profession. I would 
encourage anyone who has an aptitude for 


resolving disputes or an aptitude for trying 
to solve thorny issues to give the law every 
consideration. I was drawn to it because I 
wanted to be involved in public service in 
some way. I think a person who wants to 
become a lawyer has to be willing to expend 
the time that’s going to be necessary to do an 
effective job. If you’re in the public sector then 
the compensation will be in the rewards that 
come from serving the public and not always 
monetary compensation. 

If you’re a private practitioner, then, of 
course, the monetary compensation will 
be greater, but I don’t think that should 
be a primary consideration for going into 
law. You have to enjoy the law. You have 
to enjoy resolving disputes. You have to 
enjoy representing people and being able to 
advocate a position. You have to be able to do 
so zealously, but with an overall concept of 
fairness. And you should not get so involved 
in the cause of your client that you don’t 
understand that there are competing issues 
in every case and that you have to take an 
objective look at what you’re doing. 

I guess the piece of advice that I give 
everyone who is considering the field of 
law is to keep balance in your life. It’s easy 
for attorneys to get so wrapped up in what 
they’re doing that they forget about their 
family. They forget about being able to relax. 
The advice that I give to young attorneys who 
are being admitted to the federal bar is to 
keep that good balance between professional 
responsibilities and yet committing yourself 
totally to the family. I have had a basic rule 
all these years—hopefully, I’ve lived up to 
it—and that is if I ever had to make a choice 
between my family and my profession, my 
family would come first. I would resign from 
whatever I was doing. Fortunately, I’ve not 
had to make that choice because I, hopefully, 
have made some fairly decent decisions in 



86 


Howard D. McKibben 


drawing that appropriate balance particularly 
with the support and help of my wonderful 
wife Mary Ann and our children Mark and 
Susan. 

It has also helped that I have been 
blessed with a wonderful staff including my 
administrative assistants Lois Storke and 
Beverly Newell who worked with me so ably 
while I was district attorney and then on the 
state bench. And then Dorothy McRee and 
Candice Rowe while I have been on the federal 
bench. Candice continues to be invaluable to 
me in maintaining our chambers. She has 
made my job much easier and is a joy to work 
with. I have also appreciated the wonderful 
services of my long-time court reporter Kathy 
French and my courtroom deputies Paris 
Rich and Bette Stewart. And, I have been very 
fortunate to have been served so well by my 
career law clerk Emily Gust and by all of my 
law clerks, without whom it would have been 
very difficult to serve on the court. I am deeply 
indebted to every member of my staff, the 
clerks office, and the entire court family for 
their incredible contribution to our chambers 
and the administration of justice. 

I would say that it’s a demanding 
profession, but it’s an incredibly rewarding 
profession. I think we need young people 
who believe in the law and believe in the need 
for people to have very competent, ethical, 
qualified people representing them. We need 
young people who believe in justice and want 
to be a part of this venerable profession. 

One thing has been a little troubling 
to me over the years. I’ve noticed that our 
profession is not as respected, I think, now 
as it was when I first started the practice of 
law. You hear jokes about lawyers or you 
hear disparaging comments about lawyers 
or you see advertising that is not appropriate 
and it is troubling. I think lawyers have to be 
concerned not only about what they are doing 


individually, but the impact of their conduct 
on the profession as a whole. 

I would strongly urge those who are 
contemplating entering the profession to be 
ethical, be professional, and always remember 
that civility and fairness is the coin of the 
realm. In my book, the lawyer whose word is 
his or her bond will be successful. I guess that 
summarizes my thought on that anyway. 

I think that’s well said. I really do appreciate 
the time you’ve given me to chat over these few 
years to do this oral history. I really appreciate 
your candor and I’ve enjoyed it a great deal. 

Yes, well, I’ve enjoyed it, too. 




