Lehman A. “Monk” Ferris 
Life of a Busy Man 


Recollections oe My Work as an Architect, 
Building Inspector, and Civic Leader 

Interviewee: Lehman A. “Monk” Ferris 
Interviewed: 1970 
Published: 1971 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #042 


Description 

Lehman A. “Monk” Ferris was born in 1893 in San Jose, California. His father was a gunslinging sign painter in his 
early days, who later became an architect. His mother was from a pioneer family which emigrated from St. Louis, 
Missouri to Watsonville, California in a wagon train. From Watsonville, the Ferris family moved to Colorado and 
then back to Pacific Grove, California, finally moving to Reno in 1906. Northern Nevada has been Mr. Ferris’s 
home since that time. 

Mr. Ferris studied electrical engineering at the University of Nevada, but family financial problems interrupted his 
studies in his junior year. He then became a mine electrician at the Nevada Hills mine, and after losing a thumb in 
a mine accident he went to McGill with a survey crew. Before long he became a draftsman and later went to work as 
a specifications writer and superintendent of construction. Eventually Ferris went into partnership with his father 
as an architect; the Depression forced the dissolution of their firm in 1932. 

After a variety of construction-related jobs he became the Reno Building Inspector in 1935, and started to develop 
an architectural practice in the evenings. In 1945 he again took up the practice of architecture full time, eventually 
forming a partnership with Graham Erskine. His firm designed Reno High School, Wooster High, Hug High, the 
Legislative Building in Carson City, and Harold’s Club. 

As a result of his experience with the construction industry, Mr. Ferris became interested in building codes and in 
the International Association of Building Officials, the organization responsible for developing the Uniform Building 
Code. He was active in this organization for many years and was president for two years starting in 1939. He was 
instrumental in getting the Uniform Building Code adopted in Reno. Ferris was the first chairman of the Nevada 
State Board of Architecture, and as such he has Architectural License No. 1 in the state of Nevada. 

Mr. Ferris had the opportunity to observe the construction industry evolve. In his oral history, he details building 
construction practices and the development of the architectural and engineering professions in northern Nevada 
during the early and mid-1900s. 



Lehman A. “Monk” Ferris: 
Life of a Busy Man 




Lehman A. “Monk” Ferris: 
Life of a Busy Man 

Recollections of My Work as an Architect, 
Building Inspector, and Civic Leader 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1971 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1971. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

Special Introduction, by Professor Bruce Douglas xiii 

1. My Early Life and Education 1 

2. Reminiscence about My Parents and Their Families 5 

3. College Years: The University of Nevada 15 

4. Wartime Activities 23 

5. Incidents of My Early Career 27 

6. Ferris & Son: Early Practice in Architecture, 1908-1932 33 

7. Depression Years: Boulder Dam, Nevada State Highway Department 41 

8. Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoning and Planning 47 

9. Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 67 

10. Nevada State Board of Architecture 97 



Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


viii 

11. Activities with Professional Organizations 107 

12. Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920-1970; 115 

Changes in Building Materials. 

13. Summary of Architectural Career 141 

14. Civic and Fraternal Affairs 151 

15. A Note about My Daughters 165 

16. Conclusion 169 

Original Index: For Reference Only 177 



Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Lehman A. “Monk” Ferris is a native 
of California, born in 1893. He attended 
public schools in California and in Nevada 
and studied engineering at the University 
of Nevada in Reno. With this educational 
training, and with his father’s architectural 
business as a pattern, Mr. Ferris began a career 
in building and construction in Nevada that 
lasted more than fifty years. He became one 
of the state’s outstanding architects and a 
building expert well known all over the nation. 
Professor Bruce Douglas’s introduction to 
the oral history outlines and evaluates some 
of Mr. Ferris’s man;’ contributions to the 
building profession and to Nevada society. 

When invited to participate in the Oral 
History Project, Mr. Ferris accepted graciously. 
He was a cooperative and enthusiastic 
chronicler of his affairs through thirteen 
recording sessions, all held at his home in 
Reno between April 22 and August 5, 1970. 
Mr. Ferris’s review of his oral history resulted 
in no substantial changes in language or 
text, and in the addition of a number of 
informational footnotes to aid the researcher. 


The Oral History Project of the University 
of Nevada, Reno, Library preserves the past 
and the present for future research by tape¬ 
recording the reminiscences of persons who 
have figured prominently in the development 
of Nevada and the West, scripts resulting from 
the interviews are deposited in the Special 
Collections departments of the University 
of Nevada Libraries at Reno and Las Vegas. 
Lehman A. Ferris has generously assigned 
his literary rights in his oral history to the 
University of Nevada, and has designated his 
memoir as open for research. 

Mary Ellen Class 
University of Nevada, Reno 
1971 




Special Introduction 


L. A. “Monk” Ferris was born in 1893 
in San Jose, California. His father was a 
gunslinging sign painter in his early days who 
later became an architect. His mother was 
from a pioneer family which emigrated from 
St. Louis, Missouri to Watsonville, California 
in a wagon train. From Watsonville, the Ferris 
family moved to Colorado and then back to 
Pacific Grove, California, finally moving to 
Reno in 1906. Northern Nevada has been Mr. 
Ferris’ home since that time. 

Mr. Ferris inherited the self-reliant 
pioneer influence of his parents and has 
been a leader throughout his professional 
life. The following episode from his college 
days illustrates his get-it-done approach: He 
and his pals were not invited to join either 
one of the two fraternities then available, so 
they started their own. They took the drastic 
action of surreptitiously obtaining the luggage 
of newly arriving collegians and dropping it 
off at their own fraternity house. When the 
owners of the luggage came to retrieve their 
belongings, they were phi with the advantages 
of the neophyte Phi Delta Tau. In this way 


the Phi Delta Tau’s managed to acquire the 
baseball team and a good part of the football 
team as pledges. They later became affiliated 
with the ATO fraternity. 

Mr. Ferris studied electrical engineering 
at the University of Nevada, but family 
financial problems interrupted his studies in 
his junior year. He then started his career as 
a mine electrician at the Nevada Hills mine, 
and after losing a thumb in a mine accident 
he went to McGill with a survey crew. Before 
long he became a draftsman and soon 
thereafter went to work as a specifications 
writer and superintendent of construction. 
Eventually he went into partnership with his 
father as an architect; the depression forced 
the dissolution of their firm in 1932. 

After a variety of construction related jobs 
he became the Reno Building Inspector in 
1935, and started to develop an architectural 
practice in the evenings. In 1945 he again 
took up the practice of architecture full 
time, eventually forming a partnership 
with Graham Erskine. Examples of local 
structures designed by his firm are the Reno 



XIV 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


High School, Wooster High, Hug High, 
the Legislative Building in Carson city, and 
Harolds Club. 

As a result of his experience with the 
construction industry, Mr. Ferris became 
very interested in building codes and in 
the International Association of building 
Officials, the organization responsible for 
developing the Uniform Building Code. He 
was active in this organization for many years 
and president for two years starting in 1939. 
He was instrumental in getting this building 
code adopted in Reno. In addition, he was the 
first chairman of the Nevada State Board of 
Architecture, and as such he has Architectural 
License No. 1 in the state of Nevada. 

Mr. Ferris’ oral history is a most interesting 
account of a local architect who had the 
opportunity to observe the construction 
industry evolve. Researchers concerned with 
the life of northern Nevada during the early 
and mid-1900’s should take special note 
of the building construction practices and 
the development of the architectural and 
engineering professions during that time. 

Bruce Douglas 

Assistant Professor of Engineering 
University of Nevada, Reno 
1971 



1 


My Early Life and Education 


I wanted to start in today with being 
born, which, as you know, is May 14,1893, in 
San Jose, California. And as a sidelight right 
there, at one time one of my relatives, an aunt, 
living in San Jose had died, and my mother 
wanted to go to her funeral. So I took Mother 
to the funeral, and afterwards, I asked her if 
she would show me where I had been born 
(which was on Third Street, just off St. James 
Park). And she took me over there, and on 
that site was a garage of the Osen Motor Sales 
Company. And in Reno, at the same time, I 
was putting a new floor in the Osen Motor 
Sales garage [laughing]. 

Well, shortly after I was born, we moved 
to Watsonville, California, where we evidently 
lived with my mother’s parents, whose name 
was Hamm. Grandfather [Jeremiah) Hamm 
made his living by training horses for the San 
Francisco fire department. When they were 
trained, he sold them to the department. 

My early days, as I remember them in 
Watsonville, was a matter of swimming in the 
Pajaro River and stealing watermelons and 
strawberries from the Chinese. They had lots 


of Chinese there. And also, at that time, they 
had boats which came to Watsonville from 
San Francisco and loaded up with fruits and 
vegetables, and so forth. And it was always 
interesting to go down and watch the boats 
come in. 

From Watsonville, we went to Cripple 
Creek, Colorado. All I can remember of 
Cripple Creek, Colorado is digging little 
holes in the ground and putting up a little 
headframe and having a little “mine” of my 
own. Don’t remember much of anything else. 
I do remember, though, when we moved to 
Colorado Springs. And my grandfather was 
alive there. That was Grandfather Ferris. 

Grandfather [Edward] Ferris had a linen 
establishment, silk and linen, which he sold 
both in Colorado Springs and in Philadelphia. 
And he made trips to Europe every year to 
buy these linens. I can remember playing 
pinochle with my grandfather. He’d get so mad 
when he lost. We’d play it on a lap board that 
went around. You set it down when you were 
sewing across a chair. [It] fitted around you 
here and went out like this [gesture]. 



2 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


I took long walks with Grandfather, out 
to the Garden of the Gods, even. And on 
one occasion, my father took me on top of 
the highest rock in the Garden of the Gods, 
[a collection of tall (200-300 feet) rocks a 
few miles from Colorado Springs], and I 
could still remember looking down at one 
spot where there was a rather narrow ledge. 
I don’t know whether it was three feet wide 
or five feet wide, but in my memory, this was 
a narrow ledge. And it was nine miles down 
to the ground. [Laughing] I can remember 
when I got on top of it, I laid down on the 
top of the rock and put my hands out like this 
[gesture] to make sure that I wasn’t going to 
topple. Then I got over that, then came down 
in nice shape. 

Also, at that time in Colorado Springs, 
something that might be interesting to 
somebody—. The main hotel of Colorado 
Springs was called the Antlers Hotel. And 
during the time we were there, the Antlers 
Hotel burned down. And it was a terrific fire- 
great big, wooden building. And there was a 
lumber yard next to it, and the lumber yard 
caught fire, too, So it was a real spectacle. 

One other thing I remember. In 1900, we 
were in Colorado Springs. At twelve o’clock 
midnight, my father got me out of bed, 
wherever I was. I remember his picking me 
up. He took me outside and held me in his 
arms, and the whistles were blowing and the 
bells were ringing, and he said, “This is the 
only time thee will hear the century bells.” I 
remember that just as plainly—. 

From Colorado Springs, we went to 
Trinidad [Colorado]. Trinidad was, at 
that time, a coal mining town. And I can 
remember two things there. There were a 
group of Indians called Penitents. And they 
had a yearly festival at which they whipped 
one another on their bare backs with some 
sort of thorny twigs that they got from the 


surrounding country. And this was very 
private. No one was ever supposed to see it. 
But us kids got out and hid in the sagebrush. 
And I can remember witnessing that. I wasn’t 
close enough to get sick or anything. I’d see 
the red on their backs, and that sort of thing. 

The other thing I remember about 
Trinidad is that one of the main streets went 
from a high level of the town down to the 
railroad station. And we had lots of snow, and 
sledding was a real activity. And we used to 
sled down this hill. And I can remember some 
of the more crazy, Imlay say, lads, taking cans 
with little holes punched in ’em, loaded with 
water. And they would go down the sidewalk 
and sprinkle this water. And this would freeze. 
And then they’d try to go down the sidewalk 
on skates. And that was the time of broken 
legs and arms, and all kinds of trouble. I can 
remember the uproar that this finally caused, 
and they finally put an end to it. 

We moved to Pacific Grove [California]. 
My father at that time was a sign painter by 
trade. And as a matter of fact, he earned his 
living as a sign painter until we came to Reno. 
He was also a musician (he played the flute in 
the local orchestra). Outside of that, though, 
he didn’t seem to have very many contact’s 
outside of the people he met in the orchestra. 

In Pacific Grove, I learned to fish a bit. I 
earned some money cleaning out the boats 
of fishermen who came in after a day’s sport. 

We played all over that peninsula. One 
of the games we used to play was “hare and 
hounds.” And we would wind up usually at 
Carmel. And at that time, which was 1905, 
about, roughly, Camel Mission was just a 
deserted building with one priest and the 
smell of dead animals. There were no homes 
or anything of that sort around there, r 
remember the shipwrecks that we used to 
have, And I can remember playing hare and 
hounds one time. There was a shipwreck 



My Early Life and Education 


3 


that was loaded with telephone poles. And 
these telephone poles had all drifted into a 
little inlet. And I thought that as I was being 
chased (I was a hare, and the hounds were 
close), that I’d simply scale down this little 
cliff (it was only twenty or thirty feet high) 
and run across on those poles, well, I got 
down, all right. And when I got on the poles, 
t started to run on then, they were turning 
on me. And I had the darnedest time getting 
across. It was only perhaps fifty or sixty feet 
across this little bunch of water. I nearly went 
in sometimes [laughing]. These things—I 
don’t care whether you put them in or not, 
but they just keep coming to me as things that 
have happened. 

I can remember, too, whenever there was 
a Chinese funeral, we used to go down to the 
graveyard after the funeral and eat the roast 
pork that they left for the dead man [laughing] 
on his journey to Heaven. 

We stayed in pacific Grove, where I went 
to finally the eighth grade, I guess. I was in the 
eighth grade when we moved in 1906, right 
after the earthquake. And I can remember 
coming up on top of the stable. Well, this had 
a better name than that, but it was a stable. 
And it had a tower. And from that tower, you 
could see the smoke of the San Francisco fire 
on a good day [laughing]. 

And another odd thing about that (which 
nobody’ll be interested in) was that my 
present wife, Bunny, lived in pacific Grove at 
the time. Of course, we never saw each other. 
I was four or five years older than she was. But 
the two of us lived [there), and then we finally 
met again in Reno. 

Well, from there, we came to Reno. I 
was in the eighth grade and went to the old 
Southside school. From there, we moved into 
the old high school, which was on West and 
Fifth Street, I guess. This was 1890 type of 
building with high steps to the first floor and 


very steep steps to the second floor. I went to 
school there in 1907. It must’ve been 1907.1 
graduated from high school in [19] 10-1/2. 
That’s at Christmas. I was three and a half 
years in high school. 

Nothing transpired. There was one little 
incident in high school that I have remembered 
with a little amusement, that in the physics 
class. During that time, the bell system went 
out of order. And our physics teacher said it 
would be a good exercise for the class to find 
out what happened and to repair it. So we 
went around to find out what happened. We 
found a break in the wire in the attic. Arid 
the attic of that building must’ve been fifteen 
feet high, the old roofs, you know, that went 
way up. And it was rather dark up there. And 
one of our boys who hadn’t been too smart in 
physics was with us, and we told him that if 
he would take the two ends of that wire and 
put them on his tongue, that when we got 
current in the wires, he could taste it because 
it would taste salty. So he sat up there and kept 
the wires on his tongue while we went down 
and got all the batteries we could find. In those 
days, the battery was a little circular battery, 
about three inches in diameter and about eight 
inches high, had one and a half volts, is all. We 
got two cases of them and connected all the 
batteries up in a series. And when the juice 
went through, Chester [laughing] stuck his 
foot through the ceiling! And where should 
he be located, but right over Dr. Ed Dopey 
Chase’s office. (He was the principal of the 
[laughing] high school.) So who got blamed 
for it but me, and I was forced from then on 
to study in Dopey Chase’s office and carry 
messages around to the various teachers. And 
I had really a ball for a while. 

There was also, at that high school, the 
one good well for water for that entire area. 
People used to come there with buckets and 
get water by the hour. 



4 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Well, the eraser-throwing incident was in 
high school. I threw this eraser at Van Camp, 
I think his name was. And he was standing, 
reading a book during a study session. We 
were doing all kinds of things in those days, 
a little stuff in the inkwells which made gas. 
And I can remember Frank Golden would lift 
his seat top ([gesturing] this was the seat), and 
as he brought it down, he’d go, “Aw me-e-e-e,” 
tried to make believe it squeaked. And he’d 
yell [laughing] like nobody’s business. Well, 
then, we’d also put a little cayenne pepper in 
the stove. They got it heated with stoves. And 
that also gave us a little respite once in a while 
from studies. 

And on this particular day, I thought that 
I would startle this Mr. Van Camp. And they 
had erasers that were soft, had a stiff back and 
then a lot of soft—I don’t know what they call 
them. Anyhow, they were soft and hard, both. 
I thought that I would just throw this eraser 
as hard as I could and hit the blackboard 
alongside of Van Camp and watch him jump. 
Well, I didn’t hit the blackboard. I hit him 
right on the jaw with the chalky side of this 
eraser. And I could throw! That didn’t go easy. 
And that man stood there, chewing his lip 
[laughing], and read his book. And he never 
said a word about it. 

Our principal at that time was named [E. 
E.] Winfrey. One day, I had gone out in the 
hall to get a drink of water. They had a tank 
with a little faucet that you got your drinking 
water [from], and Chump Seitz, another 
fellow, was out there, and we got into a bit 
of a wrestling match. And I couldn’t think of 
anything to do but throw the water cooler at 
him, which I did. [Laughing] Lie was running 
down the stairs and the water cooler bounced 
down the stairs after him. Winfrey got me 
into his office and he started talking to me, 
and then he called me a whelp and an imp of 
Satan. And I thought that [if] anybody called 


you a whelp, you had to do something about 
it, so I hit him [laughing] and left, fast. And 
I was immediately barred from school and 
required to come to Miss [Goodwin] Doten 
(a relative of the Doten at the University, 
I believe; she also had study periods), and 
apologize to her. And this, I refused to do. My 
father at the time was designing a couple of 
schools for the school board. And naturally, 
they talked to him, and he talked to me, and 
I don’t remember that he just talked to me, 
as a matter of fact. But [laughing] he wanted 
me to go and apologize. And finally, after a 
week, I went in and apologized to Miss Doten. 
I’ve forgotten what I said or whether I was 
sullen or what it was. But anyhow, I got back 
to school. 



2 


Reminiscence about 
My Parents and Their Families 


Lets see, do you want to talk about Father 
a bit? Dad, his family—we have a family 
tree of Dad. His family came over to this 
country, we’ll say, about 1700. There were four 
branches of the family. I was sure—I think 
Ann has that family tree, by golly. Anyhow, 
I’d better not give dates, and so forth, because 
I don’t know really what I’m talking about. It 
has never been something about which I was 
concerned, my family background, and so 
forth. Some people are obsessed, almost, with 
their ancestors, and so forth, and I’m not. And 
I didn’t pay much attention to it. 

But anyhow, they came over and settled in 
Baltimore, in Wilmington, and in Philadelphia. 
They were Quakers, ultimately. Maybe they 
were not Quakers when they came over here. 
Dad was born in Philadelphia, I believe. He 
had two sisters, Katherine and Edith. He 
went to the usual schools and wound up in a 
University, Swarthmore, from which he was 
ejected, I think, in about his freshman year for 
prankishness. He was a really up and coming, 
go-getter sort of a guy. He was on the move 
all the time, never in one place for long. And 


I think that at nineteen, about, he left home 
and came out West, where he became a sign 
painter and a painter of, oh, buggies, and all 
sorts of things. 

At one time, his father was a linen 
merchant with stores in Philadelphia and 
Colorado Springs—Colorado Springs much 
later, however. And he ran away and came 
out here to this country, and the stories that 
I have heard from—. 

An old-time gunman was his partner— 
not the gunman himself, but the gunman’s 
nephew [Kit Carson], who was also very fast 
with .a gun. This gunman in his later years 
came here and promoted the Black Panther 
mine, Which I think was perhaps a [laughing] 
promotional scheme. And while he was here, 
he told me a number of stories about Daddy. 
And Dad, at the time that he had his cancer 
treatment in San Francisco (we were there 
for two weeks together)—. At least we told 
him that he did not have cancer, although 
he did have it. But the doctor said that his 
metabolism was so slow that he could keep 
him alive for four or five years with X-ray 



6 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


treatments, and there was no need to tell him 
because he never in the world would live four 
or five years. He only lived half a year after 
that, as a matter of fact. 

Well, while we were in San Francisco, he 
told me some stories, too. They jibe, by the 
way. He came out here, and he became a sign 
painter, painted buggies, and all that. He was 
a painter, is what he was. And he would go to 
a town and immediately buy some paint and 
get a little shop and start doing some work, and 
when be got broke hed hightail out of there and 
go to another town. And his pal was a dentist 
who had also run away from home. And when 
they came out here, they had the idea that you 
did not allow a Mexican in the same county 
with you. So these two characters went into 
a restaurant for lunch. And in the rear of the 
restaurant, there was a table with four or five 
Mexicans. Dad promptly drew his gun and 
ordered the Mexicans out, and [laughing] he 
told me the air was full of knives. He said he got 
one right here, through the shoulder [gesture]. 
And the Mexicans left and he said that was the 
last time that he tried to show any Mexicans 
the proper way to treat a white man. 

Another story he told was, he was an 
Indian scout. And [as] the Indian scout, he 
was with this gunman [Kit Carson]. One of 
the stories is they were camped on the back 
of Pike’s Peak at an elevation of perhaps 10,- 
11,- 12,000 feet—I don’t know how high up, 
up near the top. And he said they were going 
to have beans. And he said they boiled them 
for three days, and they still weren’t cooked 
[laughing]. 

And he tells about killing bears and 
cutting off the paws. He said some of the best 
meat you ever ate (when you’re young and out 
in the country [laughing], I guess) was bear’s 
paws when they are encased in mud and put 
down in a hole which has had a fire, and it’s 
got hot rocks or hot sand, and then covered 


for a day, I suppose. He says you never tasted 
any more delicious meat than that. 

And he tells the story, he got married 
shortly after he came out. And shortly after 
that, a gambler stole his wife. And it seems 
that in those days, if you wanted to hold your 
head up among men and anybody stole your 
wife, why, you proceeded to shoot him quite 
dead. So this guy’s name was Jack— I think 
they said it was Black Jack something or other. 
But anyhow, his first name was Jack. That’s the 
best I can do. And Dad chased him over the 
country, caught up with him in Cheyenne, 
went into this hotel where he heard this guy 
was staying. The clerk told him the fellow was 
in his room. He went up and told the guy to 
open the door, like a dope. The guy didn’t open 
the door, so Dad kicked it in and marched in, 
and they both were shooting. And Dad killed 
him. That, he felt, this was the thing you did! 
You were all okay from then. No prosecution 
of a guy who did that, to a fellow who stole 
his wife. Why, the idea! He should have been 
happy someone stole that one! 

Another story that’s told, that he had an 
argument with somebody at lunch which 
got a little bitter, and it seems that you didn’t 
have to get too bitter, those days, till you 
pulled your gun. So he went back to his shop, 
which was a small wooden frame building, 
and he was painting a buggy. He was down 
on his haunches painting the spokes. And 
the man that he had argued with walked 
in the door. And as he did, he pulled his 
gun. But the floor of this building had been 
made by laying down one-inch planks about 
twelve inches wide, and they had warped. 
And this guy stumbled on one of them that 
was sticking up and fell. And Dad got across 
the room (I suppose it was only [laughing] 
ten or twelve feet), but his gun was hanging 
on the wall. He got across the room, got his 
gun, and shot this guy right through the top 



Reminiscence about My Parents and Their Families 


7 


of his shoulder [laughing]. Otherwise, the 
guy would probably have shot him. And this 
would have been a gunfight which, it seems, 
was all right in those days. 

He carried lead in his knee and in his 
arm to the day he died, small chunks of lead 
from some past disagreements [laughing] 
to the day he died. He showed me his gun. 
It was a tremendously big thing, and it was 
like stainless steel. It was shiny. And the 
handle was white. I don’t think it was pearl or 
anything like that, but the handle was white. 
Quite a heavy gun. 

These stories, most of these stories of his 
using a gun had come from this partner of 
his. And I wouldn’t be surprised if he and his 
pal shot some Indians and took their horses 
and sold them while they were— [laughing]. 
Oh, he was quite a boy in his younger days! 

He bought a lot of paint in one town and 
couldn’t pay for it, couldn’t get any business, 
so he moved out. He moved out. And they 
immediately started trying to catch him, make 
him pay for the paint (I don’t know what else 
they might have done to him). And he went 
down the Colorado River on either a boat or 
a raft or something—not through any rapids, 
or that sort of thing, but down the river, until 
he was in Arizona. And he got off the raff in 
Arizona. I suppose he camped a little bit, go 
on the raff, and camp, or what have you, but 
anyhow, he was getting out of the way. He got 
off this raff and came into this little town in 
Arizona, and the first guy that he saw was a 
man who knew him. And he said, “Rex!” (His 
name was George, but his nicknames were 
“Dick” and “Rex.”) He said, “Rex, did you 
know they’re lookin’ for you?” He said, “You 
better not show your face.” And I guess Dad 
asked him if they knew about him all the way 
down here, and he said, “Yeah.” He said, “The 
stage came in the other day, and they told us 
they were lookin’ for you. 


So he had to hide again. So those were his 
earlier days. 

As I say, he was a sign painter, and he was 
quite good. And when we were in Colorado 
Springs, that’s the way he made our living. He 
was a sign painter, and I have sat and watched 
him paint signs with his maulstick,* a stick 
that vent out here [gesture], and he put his 
hand on it to make lines, and so forth. 

We had gone to Pacific Grove, and he 
was a sign painter there [and a] member of 
the orchestra. But things were slow. So he 
and a friend of his named Alben Lundberg 
decided that they would come up to Reno. 
And he came up to Reno with a jackass. They 
packed their way across the mountains and 
came into Reno here. And that’s when he 
met Harry Saviers and became a sign painter 
and settled in Reno. Lundberg also settled in 
Reno with him. 

Another little sidelight—he rowed on 
the rowing team at Swarthmore. And he got 
what was called—or, what he told me was an 
athletic heart, which meant that it became 
enlarged somewhat. He had to be very careful 
of his heart and get some exercise. And his 
exercise was riding a bicycle. In those days, 
one of the bicycles that was really tops was 
called a “Victor” bicycle. He went to Colorado 
from Watsonville on this Victor bicycle with 
a little pack on the back of it to sleep on, and 
he rode it all the way to Colorado Springs. We 
lived at Monument Place in Colorado Springs, 
right on Monument Creek. 

And I remember in Colorado Springs, 
Monument Creek had a dump nearby where 
we lived, I was small enough in those days, by 
the way, that I rode the bicycle by putting icy 
legs through the bicycle instead of straddling 
it. This dump was just lousy with mushrooms. 


*a stick used by painters to steady the 
painting hand. 




8 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


And I didn’t know a mushroom from a 
toadstool or Adam’s off-ox, but I thought they 
were mushrooms. So I would go out and kick 
a lump of dirt, and there’d be practically a 
bucket of mushrooms underneath it—grew in 
nests. And I’d fill a bucket with mushrooms. 

And then Monument Place was on the 
fringes of the expensive homes in Colorado 
Springs. It was only, I suppose, a quarter of a 
mile or so up the hill till I was in the midst 
of those expensive homes. I’d take my bucket 
of mushrooms up to the back door of one of 
those places and sell it for two bits— never 
had a bit of trouble selling it. As I say, I didn’t 
know a mushroom from [laughing] Adam’s 
off-ox. But I used to sell mushrooms two, 
three times a week. 

Colorado Springs. I told you about the 
fire, the hotel fire—my grandfather. Oh, 
in Colorado Springs, I was interested in 
smoking. And my grandfather used to get a 
box of what he called cheroots, and they were, 
supposedly, cigars. And as I recollect them, 
they’d be five inches long or so, and they came 
in boxes of five hundred, all like this [standing 
up]. They weren’t too big around, and we lived 
in a rather large house in North Tejon Street. 
The upstairs rooms were not even furnished. 
We didn’t use them. So I would steal a cigar 
from Grandpa’s [laughing] box of cheroots 
and go up and try to smoke it, and never 
finished it. And then I’d throw the cigar down 
in a closet up there, with only a few puffs out 
of it. They always went out. They weren’t very 
good tobacco, I guess, and there was never 
any fire. But when my mother went up there 
one day [laughing] and found those cheroots, 
she gave me one of the few paddlings I’ve ever 
had from her [laughing]. 

That was also where I learned to roll 
cigarettes. On street corner after street corner, 
they would get a piano box. Upright pianos 
always came in boxes. And they would get 


one of these piano boxes and set it up on the 
corner and let the cover (which was on a slope, 
like this [gesture]) flop out for a sale shelf, and 
they had some sort of candies, and always Bull 
Durham tobacco. And I would wangle or beg, 
borrow, or steal a five-cent piece. And I would 
try to roll my own cigarettes and smoke it. In 
Pacific Grove we smoked coffee, and we rolled 
pine needles and smoked them, let them 
[laughing] simmer. But that was awful. But 
I smoked, I guess, until I was—I must have 
smoked till I was fifty. Then I quit. I’ve never 
smoked since. 

Oh, well, in Canada—Dad was very much 
pleased with Canada. He was an old-fashioned 
gentleman, just prim, and nice with women. 
And up in Canada, they dressed for dinner. 
They were very English, and they entertained 
a great deal, and this just was down his alley, 
He loved every minute of that time he spent in 
Swiff Current [Canada]. And in addition, he 
became, I suppose, I judge, quite popular, and 
had built himself quite a substantial business 
in a very short time. There were no other 
architects there, of course. That helped. He 
had school business, and all that sort of thing, 
and he became a member of the Royal British 
Institute of Architects, which now would be 
very hard for an untrained man to join. But 
in those days, I imagine it was fairly simple. 

But the war came along, and the 
moratorium was declared by the government 
and he couldn’t collect any money, so he came 
back here. A postscript to that is that about 
two or three years later, he was billed for his 
back rent on his office, some two or three 
hundred dollars, and with information that 
they’d sue if he didn’t pay it. He paid his rent. 
Dad was super honest. This was one thing 
that—he was too honest altogether, if you can 
be too honest. 

That’s about all know about his Canadian 
thing. I know that he was intrigued with the 



Reminiscence about My Parents and Their Families 


9 


life up there. And I’ve never been to Swiff 
Current. But I have a notion that I’ll drive 
in there one of these days and see what it 
looked like. 

By the way, one of his accomplishments 
was the playing of the flute. And he was always 
in an orchestra playing the flute, wherever he 
was, until he came to Reno, and he discarded 
it altogether. I had his old flute for a long time, 
till the corks and the joints deteriorated so 
you couldn’t use it anymore. But it was quite 
a famous old flute. [The flute is now property 
of the Nevada State museum.] His family, the 
two sisters and his father, his mother, I got 
to see once on Colorado Springs. His father 
was a linen and silk importer, I think, with 
considerable money. He used to go every 
year to Europe, and he bought his linens and 
silks, and so forth, brought them back to his 
store in—I believe it was Philadelphia. Then 
he opened a store in Colorado Springs. And 
one of the things I remember in Colorado 
Springs was his home on North Tejon Street, 
and the big four poster bed that he had. It 
looked like a railroad train to me. It was a 
tremendous thing! (1900, I was about seven 
years old.) And the silver that he had. I guess 
Anne has that silver, with the frets around 
the top, and so forth, now. We had a lot of 
it. And it disappeared this way, that way, and 
the other way. I don’t know what happened 
to the family in Colorado Springs because 
of the upshot of it was—and while we were 
there, too, it happened his father moved in 
with us. And I used to play pinochle, two 
handed pinochle, with him. We’d play it on a 
lap board that women used to use to sew with. 
And if he lost, he’d dump the cards and the 
whole works on the floor. And that man, who 
was in his early eighties then, walked with me 
to the Garden of the Gods and back one day. 
I can remember that trip. I don’t know how 
far it was; it must’ve been ten miles, anyhow. 


Well, he went back to live with his people in 
Philadelphia. There were at that time several 
members of the family there. That’s where he 
lived, and he finally became senile, and he 
was kept ’till his early nineties, when he died. 

The two sisters also left home. No, they 
didn’t; home left them, I guess. I don’t know. 
I’d better not try to tell you what happened 
to them. But in any case, they went to Paris, 
and they opened a school for American girls, 
a finishing school for American girls. And 
one of the portions of the curriculum was 
a trip, taken to perhaps eight or ten of the 
countries of the time, and those two women, 
between them (I can remember this quite 
well), spoke thirteen language’s. And they 
included Russian and Egyptian and Danish in 
those thirteen. I remember thinking that that 
was pretty confusing. But they used it all the 
time. They were in the countries every year, 
and so I suppose it—I don’t suppose they were 
fluent in all those languages, but they got by. 
So they took their girls (supposing the people 
had paid them the money in the first place) on 
these trips around. And I used to get—oh, I 
can remember a beautiful stickpin I got from 
Egypt. The workmanship, it was all metal 
and some gems, and everything was inlaid, 
a beautiful thing. It lasted with me about a 
week, and it disappeared. 

In World War I, they were caught in Egypt 
and had to get home as best they could. And 
their mother was with them. And they had to 
come back by automobile in terrific weather, 
as I got the story. Their mother got pneumonia 
on the trip, and she died. And they got back 
to Paris, finally, and then came over to this 
country. They opened a school here. I don’t 
know where this school was, but I’m sure it 
was in Maryland. They had a finishing school 
here until the war was over, when they went 
back to Paris and resumed their school in 
Paris. 



10 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Then in world War U, they had retired. 
They had put all of their money (and I think it 
was quite a lot of money) into French annuities. 
And they had bought a home in Menton, which 
is about three miles out of Monte Carlo, east 
of Monte Carlo. And they had moved down 
there, and evidently were living quite happily. 
And they had all of their furnishings, and so 
forth. So Mussolini dropped a bomb right 
through their living room, blew the house to 
pieces. And, of course, Hitler took over France, 
and all of their annuities went up in smoke. So 
they had to come over to this country, and they 
had no money. 

I told you the story of a number of these 
people who had been to their schools and 
loved these gals, made the Ferris Club, or 
whatever they—that was not the name of it. 
And they put in quite a chunk of money, and 
they got the two gals to Lisbon and brought 
them over to this country, and they bought 
them a place in North Carolina, and set them 
up in business. Of course, they only lasted 
about three years. They weren’t investing a 
lifetime of money. But they took wonderful 
care of these two gals. Dad got back to see 
them. That’s something I’d forgotten now. 
He finally made a trip. He finally made a trip 
back to Philadelphia and visited with some 
of his people, and he saw his sisters at that 
time. And I think that’s the only time in his 
life that he returned (I know it is)—that he 
returned to the East. They died in their late 
eighties, I believe. 

Now, the family all died off. There is no 
trace of Dad’s family left but one woman. I 
don’t know whether she’s alive now or not. 
Ann would know. She corresponds with her. 
Her name was [Frances Canby] Ferris. I’ve 
forgotten her first name. 

Hell, I thought she lived in Philadelphia. 
This is the tail end of the family, now, that I’m 


talking about. I’m the tail end of my mother’s 
side of the family. No one is left except Ann 
and Charlotte. And this lady is the tail end 
of my father’s family, and she never has been 
married, and at this late date, she never will 
be, so that branch of the family will disappear. 

I went back to Philadelphia on some 
trip. It was a convention, by the way. Oh, 
it’s an American Institute of Architects 
convention. And I found that a very small 
clique of architects did all of the business of 
the convention behind closed doors. And 
when you had these big meetings, why, all 
you did was find out what they had done and 
vote for it or against it. Usually you voted for 
it. And I didn’t care about that. 

So I hired a taxi driver, an elderly 
gentleman, who, it developed, had had a 
laundry business, a rather prosperous laundry 
business, until the chain laundries began to 
come in and cut in on his business, and they 
bought him out. And he was independent, 
financially, but he needed something to do, 
so he had bought this taxi, which he drove 
daily, and he was a member of the taxi union, 
that sort of thing. (Then I was back there, the 
Yellow Cabs were on strike.) 

I hired him to take me from nine o’clock 
to one o’clock each day and show me the city 
and tell me the stories, political and financial 
and all—scandal, all the stories. He knew 
them all. He’d lived there all his life. He’d 
been quite prominent. And this man was 
most interesting. And he took a shine to me; 
I took a shine to him. So he told me, he said, 
“I could make lots more money if I’d just take 
calls than I can make taking you around these 
places.” He says, “I’m having a ball.” So that 
was what I was doing with this guy. I would 
go to the meetings in the afternoon to see 
what happened so I could make a report to 
the [laughing] AIA here. 



Reminiscence about My Parents and Their Families 


11 


Well, it was the last day of my stay. 
The convention was over, and I had a 
plane reservation at two-something in the 
afternoon. We were driving around, and 
he passed an old meeting house, a Quaker 
meeting house. It’s still there. And I said, 
That’s where my father went to Sunday school. 
I’d like to see it.” 

He said, “Okay.” 

Well, he parked and I walked across the 
street. And I was met at the door of this 
meeting house by a little woman, reminded 
me very much of my mother, except she wasn’t 
as heavy. And she had a voice like a bull. She 
greeted me, and I told her why I was there, 
and she took me around and showed me the 
artifacts and the clothing that they had on 
exhibition from the early days right on up to 
the present. (And incidentally, I saw the poor 
box a number of times. I had a chance to put 
a five-dollar bill in there several times.) 

Well, she finally said to me, she said, 
“What is thy name?” 

And I said, “My name is Ferris.” 

“Oh?” She said, “We have a Ferris in our 
congregation.” 

“Well,” I said, “I’ve been trying to get in 
touch with (I can’t get that first name. Ann’ll 
have it) Ferris ever since I got here. And I have 
no line on her at all.” 

“Well,” she said, “We have a - (well, 
anyhow, she used the name) in the church, 
and,” she said, “I know her quite well. I’ll give 
thee her telephone number.” 

Well,” I said, “I’d love to have it!” 

She handed me the telephone number, 
and I called up, and a lady answered and I 
asked if this lady was there, and she said, “No, 
she’s at a neighbor’s house.” 

And I said I was a relative of hers and I 
had been very anxious to see her but hadn’t 
been able to get hold of her. 


She said, “Well, I’ll give thee her telephone 
number.” 

So she gave me the telephone number of 
the neighbor. I called her up, and there she was. 
And we had ourselves—oh, I nearly missed 
my plane. We had about a half an hour’s talk 
over the phone. And the reason I couldn’t 
reach her was she Wasn’t in Philadelphia. 
She was in Harrisburg, which has a different 
exchange, or something. Anyhow, I didn’t 
find her name. And that’s the last of the Ferris 
family. That’s the only other one of the Ferris 
family besides those I’ve mentioned that I 
ever saw. And now, there’ll be no more seeing 
of any of them. Both families are dying out, 
completely. And that takes care of the families, 
as far as I know. 

Mother—you wanted to know something 
about Mother. Well, Mother’s mother came 
from someplace in Ireland, the north part of 
Ireland, which I believe is Catholic, isn’t it? 
She was not a Catholic. And she came over to 
Canada, and I can’t tell you when she came; I 
have no idea. But in any case, she came over to 
Canada, and went from Canada to St. Louis. 
And at St. Louis, she and her folks joined a 
wagon train and came over to California, and 
she and her husband settled in Watsonville. 
And they accumulated this little farm where 
he trained the horses for the San Francisco 
fire department. He did, however, have 
some farming along with it. Because I can 
remember, at the well, they had a screen house 
around the well. And they always put the milk 
in flat pans on tables around this well inside 
the screen so that the cream could rise on it. 
And then they’d take off the cream, and they 
sold the milk and the cream separately. And 
little Lehman, when he got hungry, would 
sneak in there and take the cover off those 
pans, which was just a piece of cheesecloth 
or something, and then lick the cream off 



12 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


some of the And when he got caught, he got 
paddled [laughing]. 

Well, they came to Watsonville. She had 
sisters and brothers. And it was in Watsonville 
that she met Dad, and that’s where they were 
married. And I don’t know whether I have any 
dope on their marriage or not. [Consulting 
his papers] Jesse Hamm, Ida Marion Hamm, 
Edward Hamm, Alice Hamm, Harmon 
Hamm, Francis [Frank] Hamm, Mary Harm, 
Freddie Hamm, and George Hamm, Jeremiah 
Hamm, Susanna Hewn. How, let’s see. Mary 
was my mother, and she was born 1866. She 
was one of a family of nine children. Now, 
Alice Hamm married Dan McEwen. June 
6, 1888, she was married to my father. Holy 
matrimony. Now, what’s this? [Consulting 
papers] And she had twins, which died at 
birth, or were born dead, I guess, and she had 
my brother, Edward Oscar Ferris, who was 
born June 30, 1890. And then she had me in 
1893. Me, I was an eight-month baby. They 
almost lost me, too. Edward Ferris was born 
May 4, 1889 and died June 30, 1890. And I 
lasted. That’s about all of the data that I have. 
Mother’s death is not listed here. I don’t know 
when Mother died. It must’ve been about—I 
was going down to get a life membership in 
the international association. [It was in the 
early 1950’s.] 

She was an old-fashioned wife. She 
followed her husband wherever he wanted 
to go, and he called the shots and she did 
it. And when they had financial reverses, of 
which they had quite a few in their early days, 
she was a seamstress, and she took in sewing. 
Actually, when Dad was up in Swift Current, 
Canada, and he had to leave and come back 
here and he’d lost all of his money, she made 
the living there ’till he got reorganized, by 
sewing-at home. And she would sit and sew. 
She was just the most even-tempered person. 
She had tremendous courage, tremendous 


patience, and, of course, an abiding love for 
my father. She must have. 

And she was the one who continually 
mellowed things between my father and 
myself, because we were continually at sword 
points over small things, such as, I had to 
wear suspenders and not a belt. And when 
all the boys in college or in high school were 
wearing belts, here I was with suspenders. 
And I wouldn’t wear them. Well, that was a 
big hassle. I had to wear a vest with my good 
clothes. He had clothes tailor-made for me 
when he had money, and there would be a 
vest. And I would take the vest off when I 
left home. There was another minor matter, 
which was a desperate thing at home. Oh, I 
don’t know. We were just like that. When he 
had money, he was the most generous guy in 
the world. I had money, all I could use. And 
when he didn’t have money, he was just as 
generous, except he [laughing] couldn’t give 
you anything [laughing]. 

He was a—I don’t know just quite how to 
describe him. But I can tell you that he went 
through life without any very great worries 
about anything at any time—nothing really 
affected him deeply. And as I say, Mother 
went along with whatever it was he wanted to 
do, wherever he wanted to go; it was all right. 
She went along, and if she had to help make 
a living, she helped make a living. And if she 
didn’t, why, fine. My Grandmother [Susannah 
Brown] Hamm lived with us in Reno up to 
the time of her death. I don’t remember much 
about her. 

Mother used to play the piano, and she 
sang in the church in Watsonville. And she’d 
play; for a while, she played a very acceptable 
piano. 

Here in Reno, when she woke up one 
morning [she] said she couldn’t hear. 
And it developed that there had been 
hemorrhage, internal hemorrhages, and the 



Reminiscence about My Parents and Their Families 


13 


nerves connecting her ear to her brain were 
destroyed, the aural nerve—I don’t know what 
they call that nerve. But it was destroyed. 
There was no chance that she would ever 
hear again. And I don’t know whether this 
happened twice. I guess maybe one ear went 
first, and then the second ear. 

I was away from home a good part of this 
time, and I don’t remember how she reacted to 
this loss of hearing and how she adjusted to it, 
because my first keen recollection of Mother 
was when I was back home and they were in 
financial straits and I was helping out, and I was 
more or less in the house quite a bit, then. And 
I found that she had adjusted very smoothly 
and serenely. She was a Christian Scientist, a 
devoted Christian Scientist, and I really believe 
it gave her a great deal of support in enduring 
her completely changed status, no hearing 
whatsoever. And this, in connection with the 
rather light schedule [laughing] of social events 
and things that she indulged in, certainly cut 
her down almost to a lonesome person. 

We tried to get some apparatus that would 
help her hearing, but it was gone. And the 
only thing that she ever seemed to get as the 
result of sound was parades. And when the 
band would come by, the bass drum—if they 
were pounding the bass drum, she would say 
they were—and then she could keep time with 
her finger to the bass drum. A great big tuning 
fork placed here on her breastbone, one like 
this [gesture], had no effect on her hearing 
ability because the nerve was just gone. 

So we talked to Mother by spelling on our 
hands for a while. And she became quite good 
at reading lips. The nurses that we had—one 
of the nurses, by the way, just died recently. 
The nurses, they would play pinochle with her, 
and double solitaire with her, and they would 
even read to her once in a while. She very 
patiently went right along—no complaints 
about that at all. And she lived a fairly easy life, 


plenty of communication with everybody. She 
just loved to sit and sew, so it wasn’t as much 
of a hardship as it might have been. And she 
didn’t have very many outside interests. When 
they came to Reno, she did become affiliated 
with a lodge; I believe it was the Odd Fellows, 
their ladies’ auxiliary. And she participated 
to some extent in those social activities. But 
she was not socially adept at all. She was a 
homebody, and her interests largely lay in the 
home, and I think she was quite happy to have 
it that way. My Grandmother Hamm lived 
with us here in Reno for a short time before 
her death. And she must have died during 
the war, because I have no recollection of her 
death at all. She lived with us at the corner of 
801 Lake Street. It’s still there, the house, big, 
white, two-story house. 

But as I say, they moved to the Colonial 
Apartments, where a number of the people 
there who were almost in the status of retired 
(a lot of elderly people there), and they were 
very kind to Mother, particularly a Mrs. 
[Catherine] Blaney, who was the secretary to 
Governor Oddie and to Senator Oddie when 
he was Senator, and she knew a lot about the 
goings-on in Nevada during her day because 
of her association politically. And she was also 
the secretary to the attorney general, the red¬ 
headed attorney general, about that time. He 
came into Reno and opened an office in the 
First National Bank building, and she was also 
his secretary. So she had a rather well rounded 
experience and a knowledge of affairs, and 
she was one of Mother’s best friends, and she 
delighted to spend a great deal of time with 
Mother. And she learned to talk with her lips 
so that this was quite expressive, and also to 
spell with her hands. And I think that she 
gave my mother a great deal of comfort and 
a great deal of pleasure, almost pastime, you 
might say, until Mother began to have her 
heart attacks and came to live with me. 



14 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


And then there were her strokes. Now, I 
don’t know what to call those things, because 
she was a Christian Scientist, and she would 
not have a doctor. But she would have a 
paralyzed condition come about, in which 
her right side became paralyzed, and her left 
side was not. Her tongue was partly paralyzed. 
And her speech was practically gone. This 
happened at our home I think five times. And 
I would pick her up, and she weighed two 
hundred pounds. She was about five feet tall, 
and she weighed about two hundred pounds, 
so it wasn’t easy. I’d pick her up and take her 
in, put her in bed. And the nurse would read 
to her from the Science and Health. And 
pretty soon, she’d begin to come back. And it 
wasn’t a year, two years in coming back. It was 
a matter of a couple, three weeks. She would 
be back as good as she had been. 

One of the effects of this hearing loss was 
a lack of balance. She couldn’t be sure of her 
balance when she was trying to walk. And as 
a result of that, when she tried to turn, she’d 
go through a door and start to make a turn 
from her direction, she would hold onto the 
doorjamb. And the paint was all scratched out 
from her fingernails on all doorjambs where 
she went. 

Well, such a wonderful woman, such 
courage and patience. She just had a wealth 
of what it took. And this was not something 
that she consciously fought for. She had it. 
That’s the kind of a gal she was. Wonderful! 
Wonderful! 

And when she died, as I think I told 
you before, she had a nice chicken dinner. 
I was in Bishop and I was going to receive 
a life membership and a plaque, and so 
forth, in recognition for my services to 
the International Association of Building 
Officials. And I got a phone call from Johnny, 
said that Mother’d had it. And that she’d 
simply had a nice big dinner and played some 


cards and laid down to rest. Never got up, and 
that was good enough. 

Well, I can’t think much of anything else 
of Mother. She’s always been an inspiration 
to me. I’ve been a fellow that has not been 
noted for patience and that sort of thing. And 
knowing her helped me tone down greatly— 
very greatly, as a matter of fact. Of course, 
I bubble over once in a while now, but not 
very much. 

Well, that’s all I can say about Mother, I 
guess. She was just really great. Oh, she was, 
I tell you! She was something. 



3 


College Years: 
The University of Nevada 


I went to work in Gray-Reid-Wright’s 
after high school in the crockery department, 
where I managed to break quite a bit of 
Haviland before I was finally let out, and 
entered college in 1911, class of 1915. There 
was nothing too interesting in college. I played 
football, baseball, and basketball while I was 
there. 

I sang in the glee club. As a matter of fact, 
the one interesting thing is that my parents, 
had a little financial trouble along about that 
time, and to make my way in college, I started 
singing as a bass soloist. And I would sing 
for the Chamber of Commerce when they 
had affairs. And they took trips, like up to 
Susanville and Alturas on the old Nevada- 
California-Oregon narrow-gauge railroad. Id 
sing part of the entertainment up there. And 
I sang for Elks smokers. I always had a job in 
the churches that paid twenty-give dollars a 
month, and it was a really plush job in those 
days. And I sang in the Presbyterian, the 
Congregational, the Catholic, the Christian 
Science—sang in those four churches almost 
continuously while I was in college. And that’s 


the way, also, that I made most of my expenses 
in college. 

One highlight here that should come 
later (but I don’t want to forget it) is that 
later on, when I came back from the war, 
we had a quartet. We formed a quartet. And 
we sang for money at various places, and 
one of the engagements we got was at the 
Majestic Theater, where we had a six-month 
engagement singing between pictures. They 
were silent films. And we would sing for 
them. And then they usually were raffling off 
an automobile, or something, at the theater. 
And as they would explain this to the people, 
we would be singing. 

I remember a couple of incidents there 
that were real funny. A man named Galls, a 
tenor who later became the leading tenor for 
the big Chicago—not glee club, but they had 
a big singing organization. He became their 
lead tenor. He was very good. He and I were 
doing duets for, a while. And he stuttered 
when he talked, hut never when he sang. And 
he always was afraid that I would forget the 
words to our songs (which I did at frequent 



16 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


intervals). And on one night, we were singing 
for a big Masonic Shrine doings, and the 
theater was loaded with Shriners. There 
was just one mass of red hats. Arid we were 
singing a song. Right about that time, they’d 
have two kinds of choruses to a popular 
number. One chorus would be a melodious 
kind of dance tune, and the second chorus, 
wed da-de-daddle-de-da, real fast—lots of 
words. And, of course, that’s what I forgot. 
And instead of shutting up, why, I started 
to do a dance. And for about two or three 
bars, or lines, I did this little dance, and 
[laughing] I could see Galli out of the corner 
of my eye. He was as stiff as a poker. He was 
absolutely flabbergasted! And I got the next 
line, finally, and went right on with the song. 
And everybody laughed and just thought it 
was part of the act. I got by that. 

Another thing that happened with Galli 
was we were singing a song called “Gallagher 
and Sheehan.” I would sing one line, and 
he would sing the next one in answer to 
me. I would sing maybe two or three lines, 
and—”Oh, Mr. Gallagher, oh, Mr. Gallagher, 
deedle-de-de-deedle-de-de-de-de.” 

“Oh, Mr. Sheehan, Mr. Sheehan,” in 
answer, you know. 

So one night, just for fun, I made up a little 
verse. I didn’t tell Galli about it. [Laughing] 
So here we are with this guy that stutters and 
gets real stiff. I threw this verse at him on the 
stage at the Majestic Theater. And [laughing] 
he— he—all of a sudden, I saw him go just—. 
And then he got so mad. He was an Italian, 
and he—oh, how mad he could get! His face 
almost got red immediately And he came 
right back! I don’t remember what it was, but 
it fitted well enough so that nobody knew the 
difference. 

Well, sometime later, we went with the 
Chamber of Commerce to Alturas, where 
we were to put on a show. And they had all 


the farmers in the country in there with their 
foods. They stacked up a big table at midnight. 
We ate and what have you, you know. And we 
were singing “Gallagher and Sheehan,” and 
the dog did the same thing to me. [Laughing] 
He threw a line at me. I don’t know what I did. 
I said something. 

Well, getting back to the University, of 
course, the first thing we did when we got 
into the University—. The few men that I 
guess I just met when I went to the University 
had been in prep school. At that time, the 
University had a preparatory school. And 
we got in, and they had two fraternities at 
the University, the THPOs and the Sigma 
Alphas—I don’t know; I’ve forgotten what 
the other one was. But we didn’t get invited 
to join a fraternity. So we decided we’d start 
our own fraternity, which we did. We called 
it Phi Delta Tau. And we got a house. Our 
first house was on the corner of—where was 
it? First house, yes, the first house had to be 
on the corner of Ninth Street and Sierra. It’s 
still there, right across from the present PI. 
Phi house. 

And we weren’t doing very well -rushing. 
So we decided the best way to rush was to 
get the luggage of the boys who had come 
to college and take it up to our house—let 
’em come up and get it and stay. So we went 
down to the Sigma Alpha house (if that is 
the name of that fraternity), which was on 
Virginia Street, about Seventh. They had a 
little bulldog that they kept right up in the 
gable. They were very proud of that. First, 
we went down to get the bulldog, nut then, 
there were several students registering in the 
University from Modesto, Ernie Holcomb 
and Cy Young and Chink Talmadge and Ole 
Johnson—. They all had money; they could 
pay their room rent, which was what we were 
looking for. So while we were there, we just 
transferred their luggage (which hadn’t been 



College Years: The University of Nevada 


17 


unpacked) up to our house. Well, what the 
heck) They didn’t care. Tie looked like a good, 
active organization, so they came up with us, 
with the result that we had the baseball team 
and a good part of the football team in the Phi 
Delta Tau house for a while. Well, later on, 
the Phi Delta Tau went national and became 
ATO, and we became much more civilized, 
I guess. 

One of the things that we used to do at 
the Tau house was one of our boys from Wells 
(his name also was Ole Johnson) would get a 
suckling pig from his father at Thanksgiving 
time. And I think we had three Thanksgiving 
dinners in that house. And we had suckling 
pig for all three of them, and we had the girls 
come. (Of course, we had the usual elderly 
people to take care of the amenities.) But we 
had wine. And I want to tell you that we just 
nearly got thrown out of the University for 
having a glass of wine at our Thanksgiving 
dinner. But we did it anyhow, and nobody 
threw us out. 

There was another incident in college. I 
was in an English class. And this was, I guess, 
in my freshman year. It was. [Gustavas Swift] 
Gus Payne was the English teacher, and I 
thought of Gus Payne as a pretty much of a 
prissy sort of a guy. And I wasn’t getting much 
out of the English. I didn’t care for the class. 
I wish I hadn’t gotten into it. One day, it just 
struck me that maybe I’d just take a smoke. 
So I lit up my pipe and I ducked down behind 
somebody, being dumb enough to forget 
that smoke goes up. And Gus saw the smoke 
and ran me out of his class. And that suited 
me fine. So I refused to go back. And the 
scholarship committee, which, at that time, 
consisted of Professor Haseman (who was 
the director of the glee club, by the way) and 
Kate Riegelhuth, and, of course, Hartman, 
the president, they called me up and told me 
I had to go back, and I wouldn’t do it. And 


the result of that was I got—. Also, Hartman 
then registered me in sophomore physics as 
a freshman. And I had no calculus. )And I 
didn’t pass my sophomore physics. The result 
was that my whole college course was fouled 
up because I had to take my physics the next 
year. I had to take my English. Instead of that, 
I took public speaking, I remember. And I 
wound up taking the three required courses 
in mathematics as a senior, all three of them, 
and passed them with good grades. Not as a 
senior, it was the senior year, but I had been 
out working for a while. 

Another thing that happened there, this 
Hartman, in taking his physics course, I 
discovered that he had written the book that 
we were using for a manual. And he’d also 
put the acceptable answers to his physics 
experiments in the back. So I decided that 
the best way to do physics experiments was 
to take out the equipment, and then find out 
what the answer was, and cook up a set of 
results that produced the answer, and—fine 
and dandy. 

So one day, I had an experiment which is 
called the “coefficient of friction.” And this 
coefficient of friction was about a four-hour 
experiment. Hartman had begun to suspect 
that my results were way too perfect for the 
time I spent. He also checked up on the 
time; he began to put in the time you take 
the stuff out and the time you take it back. 
And I didn’t want to wait for any time. I just 
wanted to get out of there. So while I was 
working up this experiment in the coefficient 
of friction, he came in. I didn’t even have the 
apparatus set up, and I had the experiment 
about done. I want to tell you I got through 
doing that experiment at six o’clock that 
night, did every single bit of it, and did it over 
if it wasn’t right. And he was right there with 
me. Well, this glee club, Professor Haseman 
was the director of the glee club. And radio in 



18 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


those days was almost nonexistent out over 
the state. The result was that they didn’t hear 
quartet music and organization music or 
choral music that was fun, particularly in the 
little towns. So we worked up a show. And 
the first part of it was serious singing, and 
the second part was fraternity house singing 
in which we did all kinds of silly things. And 
we arranged tours. The first tour was a week. 
And we went out to Lovelock, Winnemucca, 
Elko. And Wells we stopped at because Ole 
Johnson was a tenor in our outfit and they 
wanted to hear him in his home town. And 
then out to Ely and Ruth and McGill. That 
would be one tour. And I remember that 
Prof Haseman had a little trick that he would 
do on every stage that we were to use—we 
went in to see what it looked like. And this 
guy, who was about six feet two or three and 
weighed a couple hundred and-odd pounds, 
would walk out to the edge of the stage and 
throw out his arms like this [full spread] 
and say, “Even the seats were in tiers! Wah, 
wah, wah, wah, wah!” He never failed to do 
it [laughing]. 

When we got out to Wells, fig Johnson had 
to sing a solo, and he wasn’t a solo singer. He 
was very nervous about it. Wells Valley had a 
lot of Indians, of course, and a lot of ranchers, 
and everybody came in because his father was 
very prominent. And this little bit of a place, 
with benches and sort of sloping seats, and way 
in the back where the Indians sat, was loaded. 
And the lights were Coleman lanterns. One of 
the Coleman lanterns was hanging right down 
over the front of the stage, about seven feet 
up. And Ole Johnson couldn’t go anyplace but 
right there, underneath that lantern, to sing 
his solo. He was nervous as all get out to begin 
with. It was hotter than hell, besides! And he 
had tails. We dressed in tails and white vests, 
the works. And here he is, all dolled up, stiff 
collar up to here [gesturing to jaw line], trying 


to sing a solo [laughing], and the heat coming 
down, perspiration coming down. [Laughing] 
His collar started to wilt. I’ve never forgotten 
what a miserable guy he was! 

Oh, I was in a skit, too, that made the 
memory of most of the people, called “Romeo 
and Juliet.” I was Juliet, and my balcony just 
consisted of a chair with a screen in front of 
it. And I had some of the women in one of 
these shops make me a wig. And I had a sort 
of long gown on over my stuff. So here I am 
up there. Ole, who was a very small fellow, 
got a very tight-fitting—like panty-socks, you 
know, tight but all over, arms and everything. 
And then we took paper and we stuffed it in 
the various places to show muscles. And he 
had a sword that dragged the floor, it was so 
long. Put that on. And then, first, the glee club 
would come out [singing], “This is the story 
of poor Romeo,” and so forth and so on, and 
we’d do our singing. And it got quite a hand 
every place. 

Well, one time, we were doing this at 
Carson [laughing] for the legislature in the 
old theater there. And the old theater had 
some boxes that were over the stage. And 
they had red velvet curtains over those boxes. 
And at the end of our little skit, I sang my 
part from the box. And Ole, at the end of the 
skit, grabbed a ladder which was handed to 
him from the wings and came up the ladder, 
got in. I pulled the velvet curtains closed, and 
there was a (laughing] sign on it, [laughing] 
said, “Busy,” which made quite a hit with the 
legislators. 

Another thing that happened down there 
where the glee club that was funny—these 
things aren’t what you’d call [laughing] 
anything about the life of a busy man. 
Anyhow, Tom Walker was the second tenor 
and a very good singer. And he had two solos. 
And he sang things like “Kiss Me Again,” and 
that sort of romantic song. And we were 



College Years: The University of Nevada 


19 


down at the Leisure Hour Club in Carson. 
Oddie was governor. His bald head was right 
in the front row. We had a nice, big audience 
there. And, of course, the stage was just a 
platform with a couple of doors on each side 
[so] that you could get onto it. And the lights 
were just bulbs. We had one of these lights in 
the little anteroom that we were waiting [in] 
for our turn to go on, and we were dressed up 
for our Romeo and Juliet. And Tom was out 
there, singing [singing], “Just a little love, a 
little kiss.” And we noticed that our shadows 
went through the door and appeared on the 
back wall of this stage, and quite plainly, too. 
So immediately, there began a [laughing]—a 
shadow graph. And the audience began to 
snicker, and Tom [laughing] was up there, 
“Just a little love, a little kiss,” and getting 
worse and worse off, [laughing] until he just 
finally was flabbergasted! They’re laughing 
at him! And he thought he was doing all 
right. 

Well, he came back [laughing] to the door. 
He had to do two songs. We weren’t ready 
to go [laughing] on with other stuff. And he 
poked his head in, and we were still messin’ 
around with it, so he got the idea. He said, 
“You sons of bitches!” [laughing] He went 
back out and we got off his back for the rest of 
the song. Well, out in Ely, too, when the glee 
club got out there—. All those little towns in 
those days, they had university clubs. And 
they were social organizations. They were 
going concerns. And in Ely, they had a big 
one, with their own bar, and quite a good- 
sized clubhouse—no rooms or anything, but 
public rooms in there—one-story thing. And 
we heard rumors about a big badger fight 
that was going to be put on. And they really 
worked it up. We were there either two or 
three days—Ruth, McGill, and Ely—I guess 
we were there three days. And this badger 
fight started, and there were a couple of fist 


fights (we know now they were [laughing] 
put on for our benefit), and lots of bets made 
about this badger fight. 

I happened to know about the badger 
fight. I’d seen one pulled up in Austin. So came 
time for the fight to be pulled off on our last 
night. We came in after the show, and Louie 
Rose, a tenor, one of our tenors from Modesto, 
said, “I’ll pull the badger out!” Maybe the 
people don’t know about a badger fight 
nowadays. [Laughing] There was a dog, all 
right. And somebody was holding the dog, the 
man that owned the dog. George McCreary, a 
student for the ministry, said he was going to 
“help” Louie. And the two of them got hold 
of this rope to pull out the badger. And Alton 
Glass decided that he didn’t know just what 
was going to happen. And there was a limb of 
a tree about this high [four feet], and it came 
out like this [gesturing]. And A1 jumped up 
in order to see better, (laughing] and sat on 
the limb. 

Well, when it was over, everybody went to 
the bar. And we didn’t have a nickel between 
us. And the bill for the drinks was ninety- 
some dollars. And we were stuck with it, the 
glee club. So Prof Haseman took it out of our 
treasury and [laughing] paid the bill, ninety- 
some dollars. Why, that was a fortune! 

This glee club, at the end of the year, 
usually had, oh, eight, nine hundred, a 
thousand dollars in the kitty, and they would 
split it up among the boys. And on one trip, 
we took a mandolin club along, also. We took 
quite a gang of people along. I remember that 
we put on a show in Tonopah, and it was 
Easter. And Earl Ross, as I understand it, had 
studied some for the ministry before he came 
to Nevada. And he was on our glee club. And 
we went down to Tonopah and we put on our 
show, and the next morning we were waiting 
for the train. (You went down there by train 
in those days. You left at nine o’clock at night 



20 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


and got in in the morning, and you came back 
in the daytime.) 

So we put on our show, and the next 
morning, some of the fellows said, “Well, 
why don’t you put on an old cap and an old 
shirt, old coat, and go out there in front of 
the Mizpah Hotel and sing and then pass 
the cap? 

This was Sunday. And it was Easter 
Sunday. And we had had an appearance with 
the Masons in which we had several Easter 
songs which we had learned. So we had a good 
program. Well, I put on the coat and the cap, 
and I went out and I sang a couple or three 
bawdy songs there, and I passed the cap, and 
good Lord, I picked up eight or nine dollars. 
And the boys said, “Now, we’ll give this to the 
girls because they’re going to send somebody 
to Asilomar” (which is down around Pacific 
Grove). 

Well, we got into the train. We were in a 
day coach, and there were a lot of people going 
to San Francisco that were in a sleeper in back 
of us. Well, we got to singing in the day coach. 
And we sang a few of the religious numbers 
that we knew. And then one of them, Rosie, 
I think it was, who had a ukulele, he took the 
ukulele and passed around the car and picked 
up several dollars. And the conductor came 
in and said, “The people in the road car want 
you to come and do that for them.” So we went 
back in the rear car, and Earl Ross then gave a 
little sermon, about two minutes, but it was, 
nevertheless—. We put on a regular program. 
And we passed the hat there; we got thirty- 
some dollars. And we gave that all to the girls 
for their trip to Asilomar [laughing). So we 
had a lot of fun with that glee club. 

Athletics, I’ve told you, I believe, I was a 
pitcher for the baseball team. And I played 
breakaway on the rugby team. I played front 
rank at one time, and then breakaway on 
the rugby team. And I was the center on the 


basketball [team], but Hungry Henningsen 
was the regular center. I got ruled off because I 
knocked a University of California guy colder’ 
n a wedge. The son of a gun would twist my 
arm behind my back when we went up, and 
Inn down and jumped on him, finally, and his 
head hit the floor and he was out, and they 
carried him off, and Si Ross threw me off the 
team [laughing]. 

Of course, we had our rushes in those 
days. We had a cane rush. We won our cane 
rush in something like fifteen seconds. They 
never touched the man who was running with 
the cane. Mid then we had the usual rushes in 
which a dummy was put up on the flagpole. 
And they would try to take it down—it was a 
big wrestling match, and you usually wound 
up by throwing everybody in the ditch. And I 
can still remember Joe McDonald, who was a 
member of my class, standing down there in 
the ditch. He’d been thrown in there himself. 
And he was wet, he didn’t care. “Throw me 
another one!” [Laughing] Somebody’d throw 
him down a freshman, and he’d kneel on him 
under the water [laughing]. 

At that time, I lived there at 801 Lake 
Street, just a block from the University. That 
house is still standing, too. 

Oh, yes. Well, I’ll give you some on 
Charley [Haseman] later, I guess. He was 
a very choleric Dutchman. And he and Si 
Ross were buddies. They roomed together. 
Charley was engaged to marry Emily [Coffin] 
and Si cut him out and married her himself 
[laughing], and they quit living together 
right now [laughing]! But he lived with the 
coach of the football team at the time, whose 
name now escapes me. He had a house where 
the Wolf Den is now located. And he kept a 
barrel of beer [laughing] in there, and the 
boys would—you were welcome to drop in at 
any time, sit down, put your feet up. And [N. 
Raymond] Ray Penry of Gray-Reid-Wright’s 



College Years: The University of Nevada 


21 


was a baritone who was a very good singer, 
and he had & house out on Wells Avenue. 
You know, the streetcars used to go out there. 
And we’d go out for a night of singing, and so 
forth, at Ray’s place. 

Another thing we used to do was go down 
to a boccia ball, or some kind of a bowling 
thing. It’s about twenty feet long and got a lot 
of little paddles in the end and you throw a 
bowling ball at it. And you bowled for drinks. 
We used to do that [laughing]. 




4 

Wartime Activities 


But about that time, the war hit. This was 
in 1917, by then. And on July seventh, which 
was pay day, three of us, [Horace) Fat Barton 
and Ted Bacon—the three of us took our pay 
and came to Reno to say goodbye to our folks 
and to go down and enlist in San Francisco. 
These two fellows decided they weren’t going 
to enlist, just be privates and stuff, they were 
going to get some kind of a special rating. 

Well, the first thing that happened, I 
visited the enlistment bureau, or whatever 
they call it, on Second Street here to ask some 
questions about enlisting. And he enlisted me; 
I didn’t know it, and I didn’t tell the boys that 
I had been enlisted. I didn’t know I’d been 
enlisted. So I told them what I’d found out, 
and we said, “oh, I don’t like that.” So we went 
down to San Francisco, and we were getting 
no place fast. 

And finally, one of the men in one of the 
places that we used to frequent said, “Why 
don’t you go and—they want some guys 
for radio operators. They’re going to send 
them straight to London. They’re absolutely 
desperate for operators overseas.” Well, this 


just hit us between the eyes. But how to get 
enlisted as a radio operator? so we went 
down to see about it, and he said, “Well, you 
go down to the Marconi school and you get 
a certificate that you can take five words a 
minute, and we’ll enlist you.” So we went to the 
Marconi school, and it was going to take quite 
a time learning to take five words a minute, so 
we gave him ten bucks apiece. And he gave us 
a certification, and shortly after that, we were 
on a carload of operators. We were the only 
people who did not know anything about it. 
They were crack radio operators, armatures, 
and also land wiremen from the newspapers. 
These were all fellows that knew [laughing] 
what they were talking about! But this didn’t 
bother us too much. We had a lot of fun going 
back to Harvard. 

Well, we left the Charleston Navy Yard, 
and the thing that happened on the way 
was somebody stole the chief petty officer’s 
valise in which he had all of our enlistment 
papers. So when we got to Charleston Navy 
Yard, we had no papers. “Well,” they said, 
“okay. We’ll send and get some duplicates. 



24 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


In the meantime, we’ll test you.” Why, we 
didn’t expect we were going to get tested! 
Ridiculous! 

So when they tested us, they started to 
find out what they were going to do with us. 
And they decided they’d send us to Harvard 
to study radio. Well, we went to Harvard, 
and there I studied radio and played with 
the Harvard football team. Well, there were 
five thousand men at Harvard at the time, 
all servicemen. And it was the service team 
that I played on. I played tackle, left tackle. 
But I discovered that the people who were 
giving the—each course lasted a week. And 
I discovered that the people who gave these 
courses were men from the fleet, who were 
not teachers. They were practical men, most 
of them. But when it came to theory, why, they 
were a little desperate. 

So I propositioned them. I said, “Look, 
I’m an electrical engineer. We glad to help you 
out. And this worked all right. I helped them 
out, and at the end of about two months, out 
of five thousand men, I was the top student. 
All of my books that you handed in at the end 
of the week, you know, they—4.0’s. They were 
perfect, because I marked them [laughing]. 

So Professor Pierce, who was the professor 
of physics at Harvard at the time, had been 
asked to go to New London, Connecticut and 
work on some experiments for’ underwater 
listening to detect submarines. And he took 
a look at the marks of all the people in the 
[laughing] school, and here is a guy that is 
just a genius, that’s all! So he got me, and 
he said would I like to go to New London 
in submarine listening? Well, I immediately 
envisioned we were going out in submarines 
and having a real good time, you know. So 
I liked it. And also, he got Fat Barton, one 
of the men that I’d enlisted with, to go with 
him, and Ted Bacon. (Ted Bacon’s father 
used to have a stationery store on Virginia 


Street—or, I don’t know, a stationery store 
or a bakery.) Anyhow, rat and I went to New 
London. Ted did not go to New London. 
And I remember Ted got so disgusted with 
just teaching (he became a teacher) that he 
decided he’d go see some baseball games. And 
so instead of teaching, he went out to Braves 
field or what—Fenway Park when there was 
baseball there, and they finally wound him 
up with his seabag on his back. And he went 
to London, and he spent all of the rest of the 
war going from Portugal to London and back 
to Portugal, bringing creosoted ties, Woods 
of various kinds, [Laughing] Boy, what a job 
he got into! 

Well, Fat was soon sent to Stevens 
Institute in New York city to study for an 
engineering ensign. And he became an 
ensign. And I became Professor Pierce’s top 
laboratory man. I stayed right there in New 
London until the war was over. We had a very 
successful experiment that had to do with the 
transmission of sound through water. Sound 
travels about four times as fast through water 
as it does through air, and you can detect it 
at as much as two and three miles from a 
ship. A submarine underwater makes a very 
definitive sound, a very distinctive noise; its 
motors, and so forth, give a high-pitched hum 
you can’t miss. 

I can remember that we used to have 
to go out on Long Island Sound with our 
experiments. Three or four laboratories would 
send their head laboratory men with one of 
their experiments. And we’d drop them down 
through a hole in this raft, which was about 
almost as big as this room—not as big as this 
room, twenty feet square—in a hole in there, 
and were rolling around the hole, and your 
experiments are dropped down there, and 
you listen to the traffic as it goes by and see 
if you can determine whether you’re hearing 
the sound of the propellers, or whether you’re 



Wartime Activities 


25 


hearing the sound of motors, or what the 
heck it is. 

Well, one day while we were out, they 
sent a submarine to cruise around us. And 
we were not listening. We were humped with 
our hands in our pockets and our shoulders 
up under our ears. Oh, it was cold out there! 
And we didn’t do too much listening. Most of 
these experiments weren’t working, anyhow. 
So when we made our report on that day, we 
didn’t say anything about a submarine. And I 
tell you, we sure got it! They told us that we’d 
sure know when there was a submarine the 
next time, or else! 

Well, one of the boys said, “you know, I 
noticed something that was kind of phony.” 
He said, “All the traffic that usually went by 
us just almost disappeared, It was way away 
from us when that submarine cane around.” 
He said, “I’ll bet you that the next time a 
submarine is there, we’ll notice that the traffic 
isn’t there.” That was true. And we never had 
any more trouble about submarines. 

Well, I’ll tell you. Maybe they’d be 
interested to hear about a couple of them. 
Professor Pierce’s experiment consisted of 
using telephone transmitters that—I don’t 
mean a big horn on the end of it, but the little 
bit of a container that held the graphite or the 
carbon, or whatever they used. They used 
twelve of them, a foot apart, in a big pipe, a 
three-inch pipe. And the theory of the thing 
was that when a sound wave from a ship or a 
submarine—from any source—hit, it was set 
at, we’ll say, a mile. It was practically straight, 
although it was actually a circle as it came 
out from this single source (it came out in 
all directions), But at a mile for that twelve 
feet, it was practically a perfectly straight 
line. And if you were at an angle to that line, 
it would hit the end microphone first, and 
then the next one and then the next one and 
then the next one, and so forth. And the way 


we told directions was that we’d put some 
capacity into the forward mikes and some 
[inductance]. 

You put the [inductance] in the front one 
to slow it up. And you put the capacity in the 
back one to speed it up, so that they come 
together. In other words, the sound waves 
of this, here, are this way [jagged], and the 
sound waves here are this way [curved], and 
they are not in phase. They fuzz everything 
up. But in this system, what you did was to 
bring every one of those receptors, every one 
of those telephone mikes, into phase. And 
you were tapped off right there in the center 
of this, and you had earphones on. And what 
you heard when they were in phase was an 
increase in the sound and a definition of the 
sound, and it felt in your head that—this is 
called a binaural sense. The sensation in your 
head was as though you were shaking water 
out of your ears. It was a physical sensation, 
right up here [in forehead]. When you got 
that sensation (and you got it by turning this 
compensator, a handle, which did the very 
thing I’m talking about, electrically), then you 
took a reading. This, now, is the same thing 
as though I had turned that pipe right, the 
same way the wave was. As the wave comes in 
here and hits all these things, it fuzzes up the 
sound. You have the same thing as if you had 
turned this flat to the wave, when you do this 
electrically, and it hits the whole thing at once 
and gives you the maximum possible sound. 

That was his experiment. We would go 
out in three chasers, a mile apart. And there 
would be three listeners on those chasers 
when we were finally testing his experiment. 
And one of them would say, and have such 
and such a bearing.” The next one would 
say, “I have it, such and such a bearing.” The 
next one, “I have it, such and such a bearing.” 
And they continued to work on it for maybe 
a minute until they could feel that they all 



26 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


had it for about the same place. At a mile, we 
could locate a submarine within about three 
degrees with his [experiment]. 

Another experiment t worked on had to 
do with capacitors, another experiment in’ 
which they could tell directions. This was not 
very successful—no use talking about it, really. 

But they had there at the experimental 
station probably a dozen very prominent 
scientists working on experiments from 
various angles. This one that I worked on was 
at that time the most likely to succeed—they 
weren’t getting any real place. 

They did have a system they designed on 
the principle of a hot wire ammeter, and that’s 
as far as I go with that one. But they put them 
in mines. And they put those mines, we’ll 
say, a hundred and fifty feet apart around 
the submarine base for the Germans. And 
they’d have them a hundred and fifty feet 
apart horizontally and a hundred and fifty 
feet apart vertically. And if a submarine with 
its equipment running came within seventy- 
five feet of one of those mines, it would 
explode it. This, the hot wire ammeter and its 
connections and the system in which it was 
used, would set off the mine. And at seventy- 
five feet,, one of those mines would spring 
leaks in the submarine. 

And I remember that they had a committee 
that was in charge of our station. And Henry 
Ford and Thomas Edison were on that 
committee. And Ford made a speech at our 
station one day, which I overheard, in which 
he said that if this war went on another six 
months, no German submarine would come 
out of their bases, that they would be able 
to detect them and destroy them. Well, it 
didn’t last that long, so we don’t know what 
would happen. But that was one of the top 
experiments. And, of course, nowadays, it’s 
completely useless. But that’s the best they 
could do then. 



5 


Incidents of My Early Career 


It was in 1913, I have already told you, 
that my folks ran into financial difficulties. 
And this is about the same time Jim Scrugham 
sent me to Elko to work on the Elko-Lamoille 
Power Company’s project. At that time, it 
consisted of a hydroelectric plant in the Ruby 
Mountains, about seventeen miles south of 
Elko. There was a dam and a power plant. The 
level of the water for the dam was some nine 
hundred feet above the power plant. And I 
started there as a laborer carrying dynamite, 
boxes of dynamite, to the dynamite men on 
the grade. And shortly thereafter, I became 
the timekeeper for the layout. 

This job had two camps. The lower camp, 
which was three miles from Lamoille, in the 
canyon, in the Lamoille Canyon, consisted 
of the executive offices and the power plant 
building itself. The upper camp consisted of 
a tent city for the employment of the men 
working on the grade. Most of these men were 
IWWs (Industrial Workers of the World), 
and it was a pretty rough company. The cook 
for this upper camp, who had some sixty 
men to feed, was a Chinaman who worked 


over an open fire. They would get mountain 
mahogany and bring it down, and he would 
create a bed of coals in a little rock enclosure 
about three feet one way and, say, ten feet the 
other. And he had a cast iron grill over the 
top of it. And he cooked for those sixty men 
on that cast iron grill. When it rained, why, 
he simply put a piece of burlap and a blanket 
over his back and went on with his cooking. 
Mid the rain didn’t interfere with the coals; 
they took it. 

Well, about my third year of college, 
finances got to be pretty bad, and I decided 
to get a job. So Scrugham, who was the dean 
of engineering, I guess (I don’t know whether 
he was a dean or not; I think he was), he said, 
“I’ll get you a job.” And he sent me out to 
the Nevada Hills mine, which is about sixty 
miles southwest of Fallon, up in the hills, 
as an electrician. I had studied electrical 
engineering with him, and I’d been rather 
apt at it. So I went out there as an electrician, 
and, of course, the manager of the mine, 
McDonald, knew very quickly that I didn’t 
know too much about the big equipment 



28 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


that he had, but he was a nice guy, and he 
helped me. 

And they had a pumping station five miles 
away from the mine where they got water, 
pumped it up to the mine. And they had in 
that a motor which was called a single-phase 
motor, Wagner single-phase motor. And it had 
little shorting weights in it, and they burned 
a little bit and theyd shut the motor down, 
and Id have to go over there, take the motor 
down, file those things off, and get it back in 
operation. So one day I went over there, and Id 
just finished with the motor when somebody 
at the mine threw the switch. I always threw 
the switch and put a “man working” sign on it. 
Somebody threw the switch anyhow. The juice 
came on, and where could I be standing, but 
with this thumb just between the great big gear 
and the little pinion gear that operated for the 
motor. And the thumb went right through it, 
like that. So, of course, it was hanging. I called 
up. I told the office that my thumb was cut and 
I was coming in. 

And they said, “What? 

And this telephone line was just laying 
over the bushes and it blew out a static. And I 
got the idea that “thumb” was kind of gutteral, 
and Id say something they could be sure they 
heard, so I said, “My hand is off.” 

And he didn’t wait for any more-. He just 
said, “Oh, my God,” and cut it off. And then 
I had to decide whether I’d come over the 
mountain to get back or whether I’d go around 
by the road. And I thought, “Well, I’ll go 
around by the road. Some guy might get smart 
and come out with an automobile.” So I went 
around by the road, and the superintendent 
of the mine and everybody he could grab 
came over the hill. And when they got down 
and couldn’t find me, they decided that with 
my hand off, I’d wandered out in the brush 
and bled to death. So they searched all over, 
every place. 


In the meantime, McDonald decided, 
“Well, I know that chicken, He’s going to 
come by the road and hope somebody’ll pick 
him up.” So he drove a car down and picked 
me up and brought me in. And the doctor, 
I remember, [laughing] he had a bottle of 
iodine that high [gesturing], and he just 
poured iodine over it. I don’t know whether 
it did any good or not. It didn’t hurt. I had 
tied a string around here [base of thumb] and 
stopped the bleeding. But when we got started 
for home, it began to hurt, all right. And by 
the time we got to Fallon—oh, going across 
that flat, that mud flat, we had to go around 
a big wagon. And they just unhitched the 
mules and pulled us right through the mud 
around the wagon and back up on the road 
[laughing]. 

Well, I got into Fallon [and] they gave me 
something for the pain. The train was due at, 
I think, ten minutes of one in Hazen. And we 
were just kitin’ to get there. And ten minutes 
of one came, and we still had ten minutes to 
go. We got in there at one o’clock, and the 
train got in there at one o’clock. So I got in 
here about two o’clock in the morning. It was 
November seventh; it was an election year, an 
election night. This guy [Dr. Stadtherr] who 
I wanted, who was for the Nevada Industrial 
commission—now, you know him so well. 
He’s in Salt Lake City in a home now—not a 
home, but he went nuts. Anyhow, he was at 
an election party at the Riverside Hotel and 
he was pretty well oiled. And they called him 
from the hospital, which, at that time, was 
on California Street and Humboldt, I think, 
where that school is [Reno Business College], 
Lander and California. That was the Mount 
Rose Hospital. He came out there and met 
me, and he said, “I’m going to take it off right 
down here.” 

I said, “Oh, no, you’re not. I’m not going 
to have just this for a hand.” 



Incidents of My Early Career 


29 


He said, “If you don’t, you’ll lose your 
arm.” 

I said, “I won’t lose my arm. Take it off 
here.” 

You can see where the flesh was, from here 
and from here [at the base], it was hanging, 
and the bone stuck straight out. He snipped 
off the bone. Oh, I tell you, I never felt so 
good in my life as when he gave me a little 
anesthetic down there! Brother! He snipped 
off the bone and sewed this up, and as I say, he 
was oiled, and he just pssh, pssh, pssh, pssh, 
pssh, clap, clap [demonstrating the doctor’s 
quick precision in the operation], and left! 
I never had a bit of trouble with that thing! 
Stadtherr! That’s the guy! I never had a bit of 
trouble with that thing. 

So, what to do? I went out to McGill on 
the survey crew. But before I’d been there 
very long, why, I was put to drafting for 
the structural steel. They were building [a] 
powdered coal plant at the time. I became a 
draftsman there. And I designed some of the 
launders* that went into this plant. 

Well, when was this? It was after I came 
back from the war and before I went to work 
with my father. And [Fred de Longchamps] 
asked me to come up and write specifications 
for a while. I hadn’t even had the little 
experience I had with my father at that time, 
but I had worked in his office. Fred was 
desperate for someone. So I came up, and I 
did write specifications by reading over like 
specifications f or other jobs, and so forth. 
And then he asked me to go out and supervise 
the construction of the grammar school in 
Elko. This was about 1919, I guess. After 
that, he got two jobs in Winnemucca, the 
Winnemucca courthouse and the Humboldt 
Hotel. And he said, “Now you can supervise 
those as well.” 

Well, to begin with, the road between 
Winnemucca and Elko, Highway 40, was a 


mass of chuckholes, and the fine dust would 
gather in these chuckholes and you couldn’t 
see them. They’d break your axle if you went 
into them too hard. So in order to supervise 
these jobs, I made the trip from Winnemucca 
to Elko over back roads. And since Bill 
Wagner, who was on the job as a roofer (he 
was a plumber, but he started doing roofing), 
was working there—yeah, we’ll say he had the 
plumbing and heating, not the roofing at that 
time. He bought what was then one of the 
top cars in the country, a Chevrolet, a “Baby 
Grand” Chevrolet, and he would go with me 
to Winnemucca. 

Well, we went up to—oh, the town 
north of Elko, forty, fifty miles, [Tuscarora]. 
Anyhow, we went out in that direction 
and over the mountains, and at about two 
o’clock in the morning (we always went at 
night)—at about two o’clock in the morning, 
we hit a place called Midas, which was a 
mine. There was a woman there who ran 
the boardinghouse for the men, cooked for 
them and so forth. And at two o’clock in the 
morning, or whenever it was when we got to 
Midas, we Hammered on the door. And this 
woman who seemed to me to be about sixty 
then—maybe she was only forty (laughing], I 
don’t know. But she always wore a very heavy 
white—dirty white—nightgown. She’d come 
to the door, “Come in, boys! Come in” So we’d 
come in, and she heated up the stove, cooked 
a real feed for the table and we were about to 
eat. I can see her now [elbows on the table, 
receptive], “Now tell me!” 

What she wanted was all of the gossip 
from both Winnemucca and Elko, everything 
that was going on—who was runnin’ around 


*a trough which picks up gravel, sand 
and waste materials and carries them 
away in a stream of water. 




30 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


with whose wife, everything you can think 
of, she wanted to know about. Oh, we told 
some beautiful lies to that old lady But, bless 
her heart, she needed something of the sort. 
She didn’t have any newspaper, you know, or 
anything like that. 

Well, the Elko job went along rather 
smoothly except for one thing. The man 
who was doing the ornamental plaster work 
(and there was a great deal of ornamental 
plaster work) —doing the ornamental plaster 
work and the cast cement work died, and it 
became necessary that some other contractor 
be secured to do it. Well, there was no other 
contractor in the state of Nevada in that line. 
And they got the Golden State Plastering 
Company, or something like that, from San 
Francisco, to come up and do the job. And 
Fred said, “Now, we’re not going to pay the 
Golden State—.” He said, “We’re just going 
to pay them wages and buy the materials, and 
you’re going to run the job.” And I’d never 
made a piece of plaster in my life! 

Well, they sent up a couple of modelers, 
And since we didn’t have any modeling clay, 
we bought some fire clay from the railroad. 
And they made the models of this big cornice. 
The cornice was actually six feet high, and it 
was around a building that must have been 
two, four, five, six—it must have been between 
five and six hundred lineal feet of it. And they 
made the models. And then finding that they 
really had us over a barrel if they quit, they 
wanted more money, which we gave them. 
And then from the models, you poured glue 
over the plaster after this model had set. You 
poured glue over it and threw hemp in with 
the glue, with the result that you got a negative 
of the cornice, which you then set down and 
poured full of plaster with hemp backing for 
it. And when you got through with that and 
you took it out of the mold, there you had a 
section of the cornice. Well, we got by with 


that all right, and we put it up, and I said, 
“Now, I’m darn sure that this is going to take 
a lot of water, and it’s going to come to pieces 
in just no time at all. So why don’t we treat 
it with oil?” So that’s what we did. We oiled 
that whole thing. And the result of that is 
that that cornice, which was just plaster of 
Paris and hemp with oil, lasted until about, 
oh, ten, twelve years ago, when they tore it 
off. Well, we got down to Winnemucca, and 
the interior of this building had all kinds of 
staff work. Staff work is ornamental plaster, 
really. And the woodwork, the studding and 
so forth, of the walls, was a little out of plumb, 
it was a little out of square, and it was a little 
out of level. So in order to have the finish 
work look as it should, we had a level which 
consisted of a long rubber tube. And on each 
end, there was a glass insert that had marks 
on it so that you could judge the level of the 
water. We filled it with water, and then put 
that up on this wall over here, and put it up on 
this wall [gesture]. And when the water was at 
the same mark on both walls, then that was a 
level point. And then we leveled the ceiling, 
we plumbed the walls, and then we plastered. 
Some of that plaster in that building was real 
thick on account of the walls being out of 
line. And the staff work went up. It was really 
beautifully done. 

Well, on that job, we had a lot of terra¬ 
cotta for an outside cornice. And the little guy 
who was in charge of the terracotta work, or 
had the contract, was Canadian, practically 
a Cockney. At the same time that he did 
this work, he was doing a new post office in 
Winnemucca. And the guy from Reno who 
was doing the heating and ventilating was 
putting in smaller pipes than were called 
for on the plans. I was rooming in the same 
rooming house with the inspector for the 
post office, the federal inspector. And he told 
me, he said, “Son, you’re going to get yourself 



Incidents of My Early Career 


31 


into trouble unless you keep very good track 
of what’s going on here.” And shortly after 
that, he went on a vacation, at a time when 
the walls of his post office were going up. And 
the post office was to have grouted brickwork. 
C-routed brickwork means that you make a 
very thin grout and pour it into the wall with 
the brick. And it makes a solid wall that is 
very hard to tear down. 

Well, the minute he went on his vacation 
(laughing], this little Cockney decided that 
this expensive grouting didn’t need to go 
on any further ’till he got back, So he built 
[it] up out of ordinary brickwork. Now, the 
little devil could see, as he stood in the street, 
where he started to build ordinary brickwork, 
because the dope, the grout, had not run down 
over the outside and dirtied it. It was perfectly 
clean. All the way down to the ground from 
there was a dirty wall. And, of course, as 
soon as the superintendent got back from 
his vacation, why, that all came off, and they 
did it again. 

This little Cockney, he raised Cain about 
doing the terracotta work because he said it 
came in too big pieces and it was too heavy, 
and he couldn’t line it up because it shrunk. 

Terra-cotta, by the way, as they made it 
in those days, was made with a thirteen-inch 
rule for a foot, a rule that was graduated 
in twelve graduations, was thirteen inches 
long, because terra-cotta shrunk that much 
from the time it was made as raw clay to the 
time it was burned. It shrunk that inch. Well, 
there was a contractor named Williams who 
had had the job. He was working largely in 
the Sacramento Valley, so that the people he 
had in Winnemucca were not particularly 
qualified. They weren’t any great stars either 
as mechanics or in his key men. So the bank 
who were lending the money got very fussy 
about this job and decided that he should 
be fired. I’m trying to think of the name— 


vein (laughing]—. Well, anyhow, the thing 
was that they were going to fire this Mr. 
Williams. We had just started the foundations. 
The excavation had been completed. The 
question was, “Who’s going to carry on with 
it?” Shea and—I’ll get that name pretty soon. 
Well, the decision was that I should build 
the foundations, and that they would let a 
contract, then, from the foundations up when 
I finished with the foundations. [Laughing] 
My God, here again, I’d never built any 
foundations. So I had to go down to the river 
and bring up a lot of sand and go someplace 
and get some gravel and build forms and build 
the foundations, get everything right, which 
I was able to do. 

But the thing that was interesting to me 
was the little gossip that came on about this 
man Williams. He didn’t sue. I don’t think 
he was very happy with the job, and he was 
happy when he got fired. But they told a story 
that he’d been on a job in Sacramento for 
the state (I don’t know where the job was), 
and that after he got—the job had been let, 
and his contract was signed, he went to the 
authorities and said, “Look, there’s no roof 
on this building. And I have estimated the 
probable cost of installing a roof at $50,000.” 
(I don’t know whether we want to use this or 
not, certainly won’t want to use his name.) 

It developed that there had been a change 
in the architect’s plans in order to cut down 
on the cost of the building, and that in putting 
the drawings back together, the sheets which 
delineated the roof and the sheets, which, 
strangely enough, specified the roofing, were 
eliminated. And this guy just simply said, “I 
bid on what is shown. This is what you gave 
me. 

And I don’t know how it came out, but 
this was the controversy that had arisen, that 
this was his claim. I’m pretty sure that this 
was right. I’m also pretty sure that they made 



32 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


him build the building there, or they’d fired 
him again, too. But that’s how sharp this guy 
was—actually made a bid. And I don’t know 
whether he had the cost of the roof in his bid 
or not. Put he said it wasn’t on the plans that 
they’d given him. Well, then, there comes a 
question: “Prove you didn’t get the plans. You 
signed for complete plans.” So there you are. 
One side, “I didn’t have complete plans.” 

“You signed something for complete 
plans.” 

“Well, that meant the plans you gave me” 
[laughing]. 



6 


Ferris and Son: Early Practice in 
Architecture, 1908-1932 


We started with the fact that Father came 
to Reno in 1906. And he joined Harry Saviers, 
his paint company, as a sign painter, He was 
a very good sign painter, by the way. Shortly 
after that, he branched out into architecture. 
He got to do a school or two, and ultimately 
he did, I think, four grade schools and a high 
school for the Reno school district. And then 
he began to pickup some other jobs—a school 
in Winnemucca, and he had a hotel at Hazen, 
a hotel in Fallon. 

He did the governor’s mansion in Carson 
City. This job had started out to be a job for a 
San Francisco architect who defaulted in some 
way. So the Board of Capitol Commissioners 
held a competition for the job, and my father 
won the competition and did the governors 
mansion. 

He [George A. Ferris] writes the board 
of Capitol Commissioners (this was 1908, 
August twenty-second), and he says that, 
“Since submitting our competitive plans 
for the governor’s mansion and resume of 
specifications and estimate cost therefore 
of $24,800, we have carefully figured the 


building and find that the building could be 
erected according to those submissions for 
very close to $21,500. We have, therefore, 
added the following items to the work” (and 
here they are): three extra coats of lead paint 
and oak finish, creosote stain on shingles, 
speaking tubes, vacuum sweeper, fifty-foot 
hose, steam heat, plaster finishes, screens 
in all windows, cedar shingles dipped in 
creosote, refrigerator filled with ice from 
the service hail; the roof deck would be tin, 
flat seam. 

“We estimate the cost of plan submitted 
in combination with the above resume of 
specifications at $24,800 and expect that 
competitive figuring will materially reduce 
the estimate. We are prepared to let the 
contract at the above figure with proper legal 
guarantee. Very sincerely yours.” 

And then he goes on with a resume of 
specifications which adds all of these extras. 
And he had extra plumbing and extra wiring, 
extra paint, extra hardwood [laughing] — 
everything you could think of, stick it in 
there for the difference between $21,400 and 



34 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


$24,800. What a commentary on what costs 
have become) It ties in with the little skit I gave 
you about Bill Ward, estimating a stone job he 
had done at the Nevada State Prison in about 
this time. And he had gotten $1,700 for it, and 
his estimate, as of 1930 or ’40, whenever it 
was, was $60,000” [laughing]. That stonework, 
which went up a lot faster than other things, 
by the way—. A little sidelight on that is that 
many years later, I, as an architect in my own 
right, remodeled the governors mansion— 
that is, repaired it and put it in shape during 
Mr. Balzar’s administration. 

I don’t remember—oh, another job that 
Dad did was the Rialto Theater, which is now 
the Granada Theater. Now, that theater has 
since burned down, and I, as an architect in 
my own right, alone, repaired it and put it 
back in shape [laughing], the second job of 
that sort. 

Well, I came back to Reno. Father was 
designing an isolation hospital for Washoe 
County Hospital. He became sick, and he 
asked me if I would finish it. Now, in 1910, 
Father had been doing the Reno High School 
and four or five other schools here, and other 
jobs, like the Rialto Theater, which is now 
the Granada. And I had worked in his office 
with him, so I knew how to draw and that 
sort of thing. Also, I had done some rather 
meticulous drawing at McGill... So I finished 
the isolation hospital for him and wrote the 
specifications. 

And then, he got another job or so, and he 
was still sick, and asked me if I’d do those. So 
I did those, and the next thing you know, we 
had formed a partnership, George A. Ferris 
and Son. And we did—I’ve forgotten just what 
we did. I know that in 1928, we did the first big 
high school in Las Vegas. It was a high school 
and a gymnasium and a shop building. And 
it was quite a job. It was $225,000, something 
like that. It was a big job for those days. 


Well, during that partnership, one 
building that sticks out in my mind is the 
Cladianos building on the corner of Sierra 
and Second. We had two very fine bricklaying 
firms in Reno at that time, and brick was 
the principal building material. So in the 
Cladianos building, every square foot of that 
building is covered with face brick which has 
been cut to pattern. This is a job that would 
cost more today, for the brickwork, than the 
entire building cost at that time. But that’s the 
way we built in those days, was with brick. 

We did high schools in Austin and Eureka. 
I don’t know whether we did anything in Ely 
at that time or not. We did later on. 

However, we did in Las Vegas a high 
school. This was so interesting. The first thing 
that happened on that job was that one of 
the bidders asked to have his bid thrown out 
because he had forgotten the brickwork, and 
it was some eight or nine thousand dollars 
worth of brickwork. This, in those days, would 
have been a big loss. Of there was immediately 
a bag hassle about whether or not they would 
throw out that bid or make him do it and 
give him the brickwork for nothing. And I 
finally prevailed on them to throw the bid 
out because I didn’t think they could make it 
stick in court. 

Anyhow, so we got started. And almost 
immediately, the building inspector for the 
city of Las Vegas came up to the job every 
morning and took a look at the forms they 
were building for the foundations and charged 
the contractor three dollars. Every morning 
the plumbing inspector came up and took a 
look at the faucet on the cement mixer and 
charged the contractor one dollar. And when 
I protested to him, he said, “Look. If you don’t 
want it this way, then you can put a vent pipe 
off of every shower in the building.” Now, 
those showers were located directly below 
the assembly hail. And if we had to take a 



Ferris & Son: Early Practice in Architecture, 1908 -1932 


35 


vent pipe off of each shower trap and run it 
straight up to the outdoors, which we would 
have to do, we’d have [laughing] an assembly 
hail loaded with vent pipes, about twenty of 
them, sticking right up through the floor and 
through the ceiling. 

Well, something had to be done about 
that, but about that time, wed been protesting 
a little bit. The Las Vegas people got a little 
tired of this protesting, so they arrested the 
contractor. Pyeberg and Sorenson [firm 
name] of Salt Lake city were the contractors. 
And their contract called for them to use all 
Las Vegas labor, but they could bring in their 
key men. Well, they brought in their key men,, 
and I don’t know whether they brought in 
[laughing] any more or not. But immediately, 
they were arrested. Mr. Sorenson, who was 
[on the job], was arrested, and they fined 
him six hundred and odd dollars. And he was 
going to appeal this, and so forth, and sent a 
wire to me to come to Las Vegas. 

So I went down to Las Vegas. I went in to 
see the mayor about this fine and about these 
building inspectors and plumbing inspectors, 
tried to get the job lined up so that it would 
go along in some sort of an orderly manner. 
I finally got into his office. He said, “’’hat’s 
been keeping you?” or words to that effect. 
And I told him that I’d just gotten a wire, and 
I’d come as quickly as I could, and we passed 
the time of day. And he said, “Well, what do 
you want to do?” 

[Laughing] “Well,” I said, “I want to get 
these inspectors of yours off our back. And I 
want to get this matter of the fine settled one 
way or the other. On a $200,000 job, it’s not 
a big item, but it is certainly creating a lot of 
havoc.” 

So he said, “Well, I’ll tell you what you do, 
You have that guy go and pay the fine and he 
won’t see the inspectors any more.” So that’s 
what we did. 


On that job, the electrical contractor 
was the local jeweler. He had simply had a 
contractor from Los Angeles bid the job. He 
had put his profit on top of it and submitted 
it to the contractor. 

Another thing that happened was in 
connection with the flooring. T had to 
specify quarter-inch battleship linoleum 
throughout the school. And quarter-inch 
battleship linoleum was a fine, long-wearing, 
solid product used by the Navy, for instance, 
in most of their ships. But about the time it 
became necessary to start work on the floor, 
I got a letter from Las Vegas saying that they 
wanted to change from battleship linoleum. 
(I’ll think of that tile, sure. It’s a little tile, 
about so-by-so, one inch by two inches, just 
gobs of them.) It was a brand new product 
about which I knew nothing. And I refused. 
And finally, I got a wire to “get down here to 
[laughing] Las Vegas.” 

So I went down, and I went in to see one 
of the school board members about it and 
found that the lobby of his establishment 
was completely covered with this new floor. 
So I went Over to see another one of these 
members who had a rather large clothing 
store and found that the floor of his clothing 
store was completely covered with this new 
floor, too. So I saw the handwriting on the 
wall and gave up. 

Another job that had—now, let’s see. We 
did several jobs in Wells, Nevada, a grammar 
school and a dormitory, and something else. 
Earl Wooster was the principal of the school 
at the time. In connection with this grammar 
school, the school board had stated that they 
were going to see to it that a local firm did the 
job. The local firm that bid it was [Rockwell 
and Sutton]. Anyhow, they had a fairly low 
bid, a bid that was obviously too low. And the 
next bidder, from Idaho, Twin Falls, Idaho— 
Earl White Company, Twin Falls, Idaho—had 



36 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


a logical bid. And I recommended that they 
take White’s bid. And they said no, they would 
take [laughing] the local contractor’s bid. 
“Well,” I said, “he can’t do it for the money.” 

He said, “Oh, he’ll get by.” 

Well, after the job got going a little ways, I 
got a request for a change from common brick 
to face brick in this building, which amounted 
to, we’ll say, $5,000 difference in cost. And I 
wanted to know who was going to pay for it, 
and they said, “Never mind who’s goin to pay 
for it. I want those bricks used.” 

I said, “I’ll issue a change order for the— 
without cost.” 

He said, “No. You issue a change order 
for $5,000.” 

That’s the way these things go. If you put 
in something that’s more expensive than 
original, the architect issues the change order 
and the owner pays it if he accepts that change 
order. 

The next thing I got was a request to 
change from wood lath to metal lath for an 
addition to the contract of $5,000, some more 
protests which I lost out on. Another little 
request came for $450 for a connection to 
the city water, which connection had already 
been made, tested, and buried, and was a part 
of the contract. 

So I finally got a request for fifty dollars in 
order that they might bring the Masons from 
Elko up to dedicate this building. And a man 
named Clock, who was my supervisor on the 
job, was also asked for fifty dollars, which he 
gave them, and I suppose that the contractor 
also put up some money. Well, it turned out 
that this wasn’t enough money. So I got a 
request for a sidewalk around the building, 
and they drew a line out. It went straight out 
and through the sagebrush [toward] Round 
Mountain for a hundred yards. I’ve forgotten 
what that was; it was below a thousand 
dollars. Anyhow, they wanted an extra for 


this sidewalk. And by that time, why, I’d quit 
arguing with them. I gave them the extra 
order, and they used that money to finance a 
real good party when they dedicated it. But 
then, they thought that was just fine. 

Shortly after that, the district attorney of 
Elko County started investigating the setup, 
and they found that the contract for the 
blackboards and all of the paper and chalk, 
erasers—the whole works, seats—had been 
let to a local service station dealer. And I got 
an order to come to Elko to talk to the district 
attorney. And I asked him why. He said, “You 
bought a new Chevrolet while this job was 
going on,” 

I said, “Well, I did not.” 

And he was going to indict me along with 
the school board. The school board, finally, 
most of them resigned, and about that time, 
the district attorney died, and the new district 
attorney dropped the whole thing. But that 
was more or less the way building was done. 

In Virginia City, I had a job putting a 
roof on the courthouse and various other 
remodeling work with the courthouse— 
interior plaster was falling off and that sort 
of thing. And I got a request for a payment 
f or the roof before the roof work had been 
started. The roof was about a $5,000 roof, and 
they wanted something like $4,000. And I 
refused. The result was that out of the funds, 
they paid the $4,000 to Dick Seltzer, who 
was the roof contractor. And he in turn paid 
some unknown sum to a man in Virginia 
City who ran a sheet metal shop and who 
was very prominent politically. And he had 
told the county commissioners that if they 
would pay him what profit he would have 
made if Specified a sheet metal roof instead 
of an asbestos shingle roof, that he would let 
them go ahead with the work. And that if they 
didn’t, why, he was going to use his influence 
to stop the job. 



Ferris & Son: Early Practice in Architecture, 1908 -1932 


37 


So they were paid. 

I was going to tell you one about Ely 
I don’t think I’ll tell you [laughing]—tell 
you about that one. But this was the sort of 
thing that was just kosher in those days. You 
expected that you were going to get a cut here 
and there. It was up to the architect to keep 
out of jail, I guess, 

Well, now, I said we did schools in Austin. 
In Austin, they didn’t get enough money from 
the legislature to build their high school, so 
they very conveniently transferred some funds 
from the road fund and other places until they 
had enough, and built it, much to the—well, 
it upset the people in Battle Mountain rather 
terribly, because they had wanted the school 
in the first place. And when it went to Austin, 
why, they raised quite a lot of fuss. 

But this was more or less the way they did 
it. In those days, when I got a job, or Father 
and I got a job, for that matter, “e went to see 
the people. We talked over what they wanted 
and what we could do about it, and what we 
would charge them, and they said, “All right, 
you have a job. Get started right away. When 
will you have the plans?” And we’d try to tell 
them something about the plans. We shook 
hands. Now, this is business that’s done with 
governmental agencies, with district attorneys 
available. But we shook hands and that’s all 
there was to it. 

And it was when the gamblers began to 
get into Las Vegas and the little sharp legal 
practices began to come up—if you didn’t 
have yourself well protected, maybe you 
wouldn’t get paid for something—that we 
began to write contracts. And they came into 
Reno, too. 

In those days, I, as an architect, was also a 
structural engineer, and I studied heating and 
ventilating on my own time, of course. I had 
had electrical engineering in college, so that I 
was able to design the heating, the ventilating, 


the electrical work, structural engineering 
work, and the building all by myself, without 
hiring anybody, arty consultants, something 
which today would be utterly impossible. 
There is no architect living, I don’t think, who 
could do those with the complicated materials 
and methods that we have today. 

Another thing in those days, I didn’t have 
to worry about unions. We didn’t have trouble 
with unions. As happened later frequently, 
there were jurisdictional disputes arose in the 
design of the building. I didn’t have to worry 
about whether a material was going to be put 
on by a laborer or a carpenter or a plasterer or 
painter, or what was going to happen, because 
we didn’t have those union troubles. What we 
did for the design of a school was very simple. 
We got the principal of the school—and they 
didn’t have superintendents of construction 
in those days. We got the principal of the 
school, and we found out how many people 
were going to be in how many classes of what 
kinds. And then we would lay out a tentative 
plan, and we would set those people for each 
class of the day where they were going to 
be. And when they approved this setup, this 
was the plan that we adopted. Wow, some of 
them had gymnasiums with their schools, 
and some of them (for instance, Austin) had 
no gymnasium at all; they had a small study 
hail. Study hall was always necessary in those 
days. They always had a Study hall for people 
to come in and sit down and study before they 
went to their rooms for instruction. In Eureka, 
this was quite a bit larger building than we 
had in Austin, and there were troubles there. 

The man in Austin who had the newspaper 
was quite well known throughout the state. 
Jock Taylor. He had a newspaper, and he was 
very vocal about not building this school. 

And in Eureka—hmm. About all I can 
remember of Eureka is where the school sets 
up on the hillside. This school was built of 



38 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


brick. I’ve forgotten where the brick came 
from. We built them of brick because we 
could get them there fairly cheaply. One of 
the reasons that brick went out of style was 
the freight costs of bringing them in. I don’t 
remember much about the Eureka school. 
But it was—the same procedure would be set 
up— well, how many children are there and 
what subjects are they going to be taking, and 
where will they be during each period? And 
this was not very complicated then because 
they weren’t very fussy—he would be here, 
and if he wasn’t here, he’d be someplace else. 
What the heck? So that’s more or less the way 
we did those schools. 

Now, in Las Vegas, we did a complete 
concrete school, and a lady, I believe, was 
the principal. But nobody seemed to be very 
much interested in the design ’till they came 
to the gymnasium and the number of people 
they had to have in the gymnasium. And I 
remember, there was quite a fuss about the 
spectators’ seats. And when you start putting 
the spectators’ seats in, you start increasing 
areas. And when you do that, the money 
begins to pile up. And, of course, we only had 
so much money to deal with. 

That was another thing that I could do in 
those days, which no architect can really do 
nowadays. I could also estimate the cost of a 
building. Because most of the contractors, in 
bidding a job, they took off roughly how many 
thousand brick there were. And if it wasn’t a 
pattern brick, why, it was so much a thousand. 
If it was pattern brick, they didn’t worry about 
how complicated the pattern was. That was 
another price. And to illustrate that, William 
Ward, who was one of the Ward Brothers 
contracting firm, in cleaning out his files one 
day, came across a card of a job he had done at 
the state prison in 1905. And the cost of that 
job was $1,700. He decided he would figure 
up what the cost of that job would be at that 


time, and it would have cost $60,000, roughly, 
to do the job, which was, take that rock, cut 
it up. They don’t have anybody who knows 
how to cut up rock any more. And bricklaying 
has become a small part of building, actually, 
today. And brick masons are, particularly in 
places like Reno, small towns, are very scarce, 
and I shouldn’t say they’re not too good, but 
they’re not. 

Oh, I had a thing I know you’d be 
interested in. Oh. I put acoustic treatment 
in the State Building. Better tell you about 
the State Building first. They were going to 
have a state building across from the Post 
Office. We had applied for the job, and Fred 
deLongchamps had applied for the job, and 
they finally said, “Well, we’ll let you two 
architects do it together.” 

So Fred came over to see me, and my office 
at that time was in Decker’s building, where 
Armanko’s store is now. He came over to see 
me. And he said, “Why don’t we work it out 
that you do the heating and ventilating and 
the structural work, and I’ll do all the rest of 
the work?” So this is the way we worked that 
job. And I remember that the first sketch that 
Fred gave me of this auditorium, there was a 
big balcony, and [laughing] when I laid out the 
seats on the slope that he had shown on a flat 
plan, the guy in the top seat was sitting right 
on top of the parapet wall in the [laughing] 
front of the building, which, in a tentative 
plan, that could happen. 

But we built that building (Joe Dillard 
was the contractor). And we had a lot of 
criticism because we used brick bearing walls 
and a steel interior. The trusses were steel. 
The balcony was all steel constructed. The 
partitions were all wood studs with metal lath 
and plaster, which at that time was considered 
to be almost fireproof. 

This also had a little byplay of a firm in 
Sacramento, who were lower than Joe Dillard 



Ferris & Son: Early Practice in Architecture, 1908 -1932 


39 


in the bidding. This was another brick loss. 
They came to the board and said, “tie left 
out several thousand dollars worth of bricks, 
something like fourteen, fifteen thousand 
dollars worth of brick out of our bid. And 
naturally, we can’t go ahead with the job. We 
don’t want to lose that.” 

And this red-headed district attorney, 
Mrs. Blaney worked for him for years. 
Anyhow, he said, “Well, you have a $12,000 
certified check coming. So we’ll keep the 
check and award the job to J. C. Dillard.” 

And, of course, this Campbell firm, the 
firm from Sacramento, Campbell said, “uh, 
no. This was an honest mistake. I’ll prove 
it.” And he did. He brought his bid sheets 
in, and his bid sheet showed that there was 
labor and materials, and the two combined 
went out into a final third column, and he 
didn’t put this in the third column. So it was 
quite obvious that he had made an honest 
mistake, and it was also pretty obvious that 
if they went to court, they wouldn’t take that 
$12,000 away from him because nobody was 
hurt. You’re still paying what you should for 
the building. But in any case, we got that 
building built. 

I started to tell about the acoustic 
treatment. Some years later, the auditorium 
was acoustically very bad, and the county 
board of commissioners wanted to improve 
it, and they asked me to put some acoustic 
treatment in. So I got hold of an acoustical 
firm in San Francisco whom I knew quite 
well, and we got together and worked out 
the acoustical treatment and the price for it, 
which was accepted. The Western Asbestos 
Company was the firm. They came up here 
with their men to put on the acoustical 
treatment. Well, the minute they started work, 
[Roland] Flyge of the Plasterers [Union] 
came to me, and he said, “This is our work. 
This is Plasterers’ work. And we want it. we 


don’t want those fellows doing this work in 
our town.” 

“Why,” I said, “it’s not Plasterers’ work at 
all!” And we had quite a hassle, and I won out. 
Flyge dropped it. 

But the next day, the boss of the Painters 
Union came in. And he said, “This is Painters’ 
work. It’s the same as putting wallpaper on a 
plaster ceiling. And we want it.” 

And I said, “Well, you’re not going to 
get it.” But I didn’t have the last word. (The] 
county board of commissioners decided 
that they’d better get into the act. So I told 
the county board of commissioners that we 
couldn’t let the painters do this job because 
they didn’t know how. And they arrived at 
this deal with the Painters Union: that the 
Painters Union would put one man on a job 
for every man that worked on the application 
of the acoustical treatment to the ceiling. And 
in that case, they would allow the Western 
Asbestos Company’s men to do the job. And 
that’s the way it was done. The Painters came 
there, and the Western Asbestos Company 
boss said, “Well, you’re here. Come on, put 
some of this stuff on.” And putting it on the 
ceiling was a question of working over your 
head with a heavy roller and a very heavy, 
thick blanket of material. And the painters 
didn’t last more than about an hour. They 
were all washed up. They’d had it! So they 
stood around there, and the Western Asbestos 
Company’s people completed the treatment 
of the ceilings [laughing]. Those are the sort 
of things that happened in those days. They 
still happen, as a matter of fact. 

I’ve roamed so much, I’ve lost sequence. 
Jobs that we did together here. Of course, we 
remodeled some of the schools together that 
Dad had done originally.’ 

The application of the stucco on the 
schools that Dad designed was on metal lath. 
This was also metal lath without the copper 



40 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


ingredient in it. It was just iron metal lath, 
and it could rust out if it wasn’t completely 
buried in cement. The stucco that was put on 
was approximately an inch and a half thick. 
And it had a mottled surface, very rough 
surface, done on purpose. It was put on with 
wooden paddles. And in order to put it on 
and shove it through the metal lath so that it 
formed a protection in the back, they had to 
press it very hard. And to get the inch and a 
half thickness, of course, they were working 
over and over areas, with the result that they 
put on stucco which had been worked to the 
point where it was completely mixed. The 
ingredients were completely mixed together, 
and it was tightly jammed into the metal lath. 
And that stucco, which was put on in about 
1910, is perfectly good today, and without 
cracks. And the lath is perfectly good today. 
It has been surrounded with stucco and has 
not rusted. This, we could not do today. The 
plasterers in those days—. Another thing that 
we did with plastering was to screed it; that 
is to say, we would nail little pieces of wood, 
say, six feet apart. And we made sure that they 
were exactly plumb and exactly the same face, 
one to the other. And then they would take a 
straight edge and follow up and down those 
to put the plaster on, which made it perfect. 



7 


Depression Years: Boulder Dam, 
Nevada State Highway Department 


Let’s see. My father and I broke up our 
partnership at the time of the Depression, 
1932. And Father became the state architect 
for the Federal Housing Administration. I 
didn’t have too much saved up to carry me 
over a bit of trouble, but for two years, I 
kept our office (which was in the Cladianos 
building) open. I was about out of savings, 
and about that time the banks failed. And we 
didn’t have much of anything. So I started 
looking around for some way to make some 
money. Ted Grosbeck of Grosbeck and 
O’Brien (it was a funeral parlor at the time) 
and a friend of his were going up to Virginia 
City and mucking out some of the old mines 
to see if there was any valuable ore left, or if 
the tailings could be worked for a profit. And 
they offered me the opportunity to go up and 
dig with them. And so that’s the first job I had 
after the banks failed. 

Well, the next thing that happened was 
that Holly Malone, who at that time was [the 
state engineer] said, “Well, why don’t you let 
me set you up down at Boulder Dam?” 

And I said, “Fine. 


At that time—that was before I was 
registered as a structural engineer. So he 
wired me that there was a job waiting for me, 
to get down there right away. So I went down. 
And the job was as a carpenter’s helper. 
And I had to carry water-soaked timbers 
away from the forms and pile them on my 
shoulder. One of those four-by-sixes, twenty 
feet long, was very heavy. Well, after two or 
three days there, I got working in between a 
couple of sets of forms, and the temperature 
got up to around— I think it was a hundred 
and thirty-seven, they said. And I passed 
out. Some friends got me onto a truck that 
was coming back to the dormitory—had a 
whale of a big dormitory. And they advised 
me not to say a word about passing out, 
because they said, “If you do, the doctor will 
simply testify that you had heart trouble, 
and they’ll fire you. They don’t want to mess 
around with it at all, don’t want to see what 
was the matter— nothing.” The result was 
that I stayed there for two days, and then I 
was put on bending the big steel reinforcing 
bars in the steel yard at night. I got by there 



42 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


fine. I began to harden up. And then I took 
that job on in the daytime. 

But by that time, I could see that I wasn’t 
making enough money after the dormitory, 
or whatever they called it, got through with 
their deductions from my salary. So I came 
back to Reno. And I went down to see [E. C. 
Peterson], He was controller, I think. And 
he said that he would get me a job at the 
highway department, which he did. And I 
became a concrete inspector. My first job was 
out thirty miles north of Austin, at a place 
called Peterson’s ranch. And the next job, I 
was brought into the highway from Fernley 
to Reno. The next job, I was put on the 395 
through Reno, at which time I displaced the 
then inspector. And he immediately quit. 
Who do you think he was [laughing] ? It was 
Fred—oh, the guy that came in here and took 
over the presidency of the power company— 
Fletcher. It was Fred Fletcher. 

There were a lot of characters down 
there— [Edward C.] Peterson, who was 
controller for a long time, he’s the man who 
got me my job with the highway department 
and saw to it that I didn’t get fired when [Al] 
Williams wanted to fire me. 

You know, when I was working for the 
highway department, they built head walls 
on slopes. The road would slope out like this 
[gesture], and they’d have a big conduit going 
through underneath the road, and then they’d 
put Un] a concrete head wall to hold back the 
dirt, and so forth. And these head walls were 
standard things. They had a whole gob of 
dimensions for a head wall, with one-to-one 
slopes, and one and a half-to-one slopes, and 
one-to-two slopes, and various size conduits 
from two feet up to six feet. Eight feet, they 
used to put in a concrete underpass. 

I worked out a formula for these head 
walls in order to get the cubic contents. This 
is the way they paid for them, is by the yards 


of concrete that went in. And they wanted 
the cubic contents worked out to a fraction 
of a foot, like a tenth of a foot, or something 
like that [laughing]. This is getting pretty 
small. And they pay the contractor. If there 
were twenty-two and six tenths feet, they’d 
pay him for twenty-two and six tenths feet. 
But that way, it’s so much per foot. That’s 
the way they bid the job. So I worked out 
a formula whereby I didn’t have to take all 
these measurements, and so forth. I only had 
to have height and width—or, I’ve forgotten 
just exactly what it was that went into the 
formula. And all the rest of the things were 
all related to these two dimensions, so that 
with the formula, all you did was work the 
formula for about thirty seconds with a slide 
rule, and you had the cubic contents of any 
one of those things. Well, Williams, who 
was the boss of the Peterson Flat, Peterson 
ranches out by Austin (we did about thirteen 
miles out there), he didn’t believe in this 
formula, and he didn’t believe that I had the 
right cubic contents anyhow. As a matter of 
fact, he was very jealous of me because Art 
Loforth, who was in charge of field work— 
Art Foforth came out and wanted to know 
what the trouble was, and then he ate Mr. 
Williams up real good and told him to forget 
about firing me. And then, I remember, on 
Thanksgiving, he brought me in for four 
days to be with my family; and Christmas, 
he brought me in for a week to be with my 
family. And this just burned Williams to the 
tee. But getting back to these head walls, 
we finally got a big one, a head wall with— 
instead of a metal pipe, it was a concrete box 
that went across underneath the roadway. 
And, of course, the concrete box, it’s very 
simple to figure the contents of it. And the 
head wall on the concrete box is the same as 
it would have been on a pipe. So the formula 
worked. And I don’t know—there were a 



Depression Years: Boulder Dam, Nevada Styate Highway Department 


43 


couple of hundred yards of concrete, and 
this was a big thing. And I just worked the 
formula for the two head walls and took the 
length of the box through, and that was the 
contents. Took me about five minutes. 

[Laughing] Well, Williams just simply 
hit the ceiling! He couldn’t understand the 
formula, to begin with. He wasn’t a technical 
man. And so he made a drawing to a large 
scale, and then he measured each part of it and 
said, “This is eight inches wide and it’s six feet 
long at the bottom, and comes to a triangle at 
the top, so that has so many feet. And then this 
part of the head wall here is so by so, and that 
has so many feet.” And he worked it all out 
very carefully from this large scale drawing, 
one inch to the foot. Gee, it took the whole 
top of his desk! 

When he got through, he didn’t quite 
agree with my figures by some fraction, say, 
one or two percent; it was close. And he just 
wrote in to the head department in Carson 
and raised peculiar hell about this guy that 
was so careless in his figures and getting the 
contractors with the wrong money, and the 
contractors would be mad at the department, 
and it was going to be a terrific thing! 

So [laughing] Art Loforth had them figure 
the contents in the head office, and it came out 
what I had had to come out with, because the 
formula was correct. They checked what I had, 
and [laughing] Art Loforth, he just [laughing] 
raised hell with Williams again a second time. 
That man hated me. He hated me with—he 
would smile at dinner time [laughing], you 
know. We had to be together and eat together. 
But any time he talked about me, oh, brother, 
did he give it to me! 

And this reminds me of another thing 
along the same thing, years later. I did some 
work out at the brickyard for A1 Caton. It was 
at a time when he was changing his operation 
to sell oil, also, because the brick business was 


gradually falling off and the profit was going 
out of it. And he had a tank that was, oh, we’ll 
say ten feet in diameter and thirty feet long, 
or something—a big tank, and he wanted to 
be able to drop a stick down in the tank and 
read right on the stick how many gallons 
were in the tank. So he had to have a stick 
which was graduated, we’ll say, for each two 
inches of oil, as you came around the circle. 
Down here at the bottom with two inches of 
oil, [there was] very little oil, and it got bigger 
and bigger ’till it got to the middle, and then 
it went back the other way. So all you had to 
do was to calculate it from the bottom to the 
middle. And I had a formula for that. I used 
the formula and calculated it all out for A1 
and gave it to him. 

And he wasn’t satisfied [laughing]. And he 
made a scale drawing of the pipe, big circle. 
And then every inch throughout, he drew a 
line vertically, and every inch, he drew a line 
horizontally. And then, at each two inches, he 
could take that two inches and he’d count the 
number of square inches when he could see 
them, and count them. And then he figured 
how much oil there was, and then he went 
to the next line, and he counted the inches 
at— [laughing]. Oh, he had a mess) 

I don’t know why I thought of two little 
bits of things like that. They’re no good for 
your—. But they do give you this idea, that 
a great many men who were doing business 
which today is considered a little technical did 
not have technical training, but in practical 
ways, they got by just as well. They sold their 
goods for the proper price and got the proper 
quantities. One way or another, they got there. 
Today, things are streamlined. In those days, 
they had plenty of time, and they sat down 
and they thought about it. And they figured 
out how they were going to tell—. Sometimes, 
they’d weigh an entire carload of stuff on their 
big scales that they’d have for trucks. And 



44 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


then they would leave the stuff on the truck 
and weigh it as they sold stuff off, instead of 
weighing the stuff, since it was going to be 
taken from the truck onto somebody else’s 
truck, because they didn’t want to handle 
it twice. So they’d take it off of this truck or 
wagon bed, or whatever it might be, and haul 
it away How much am I going to charge? How 
many pounds was it? How many bags was it? 
How many this? How many that? Well, they’d 
just weigh the damn truck again. They lost so 
much stuff, so that’s what they charged him 
for it. 

One of the early arguments about 
stonework, a perch of stone—there are two 
different kinds of perches. One has seventeen 
feet—well, I shouldn’t tell you, now because I 
don’t remember. But one had so many cubic 
feet or cubic inches in it, and the other had 
quite a lot more. And when the stonemason 
charged you by the perch, why, we always 
charged you using the perch that had the 
smallest number of cubic feet so he got the 
most perches. And if you were thinking in 
terms of the big perch for your costs, you 
were surprised at the bill you got [laughing]. 

The Nevada Highway Department— 
well, this was a sequence of jobs. [When] I 
started in as a concrete inspector on a project 
out by Austin, at Peterson’s Flat, [I] almost 
immediately got into a very serious hassle 
with Frank Frandsen of the Nevada Rock 
and Sand Company about the mixing and 
pouring of concrete. And I was upheld by 
the Carson City office. So when that job was 
over, I was transferred to the work on the 
highway between here [Reno] and Fernley. 
And there, because we were using gravel 
aggregates, we were getting concrete strengths 
that they very seldom got. We were getting 
concrete that would run up to 5,000 pounds 
a square inch. And this is, oh, half again as 
strong as the concrete they normally get in a 


normal, competitively bid job. The contractor, 
naturally, isn’t doing any more in the way of 
cement and mixing and that sort of thing 
than he has to. 

Sol was transferred from there to the city 
job, where Virginia Street, [Highway] 395, was 
put in through Reno. This was where Charlie 
Hill was the resident engineer. And very 
shortly after I got in here, I was transferred 
to the Highway Department in Carson City 
in the bridge department, designing bridges. 
Well, the design of bridges—I was not an 
experienced bridge designer. I was a man 
who was given a part of the work to do, and 
gradually, over a period of a few months, I 
became able to take over the design of some 
particular project. 

But about that time they wanted to 
remodel one of the buildings, the Carson City 
buildings where the Highway Department 
had offices. They brought me in, as a former 
architect, to do the drawing and to become 
the architect for the Highway Department— 
not officially. That was not a job they created 
for me, but that’s the work I was doing. And 
I got up on my high horses and demanded 
that I get paid for it, that I wasn’t going to do 
that kind of work for them. So I finally got 
a salary which was greater than that of their 
office engineer, and his name [is] George 
Egan. And he didn’t like that. So there was a 
little discomfort in my work down there, and 
then pretty soon [Robert A.] Allen became 
highway engineer as a Democrat, and his 
statement was that, “To the victor belongs 
the spoils.” And the first thing I knew, they 
said I had to move to Carson if I wanted to 
work for the Highway Department, knowing 
I wouldn’t move to Carson. I refused to move 
to Carson. The ultimate outcome of it was I 
got fired. 

But in the meantime, Charlie Hill had 
been asked to become city engineer by the 



Depression Years: Boulder Dam, Nevada Styate Highway Department 


45 


then mayor, August Frohlich. He wanted me 
for his building inspector, and I was appointed 
as his building inspector. And shortly after 
that, t began to do a little work at night, a 
little architectural work. And then gradually, 
over a period of 1935 to 1945,1 got back into 
so much architecture that I was working late 
nights, and I got a thyroid deficiency and I had 
to quit the city. So I took a two years’ leave of 
absence, and in 1947,1 gave up entirely. 




8 


Building Inspection, 
Uniform Building Code, 
Zoning and Planning 


During my term as a building inspector, 
I became a member of the city planning 
commission. In the early days of my job 
as building inspector, I had advocated the 
formation of a planning commission and the 
adoption of a zoning ordinance, and these 
had been turned down; the city wasn’t ready 
for it, and we didn’t need to zone anything 
in a city the size of Reno, and various other 
reactions of that type. And I had advocated 
the adoption of a better building code than 
we had. The building code we had at that time 
had been written by representatives of the 
National Lumber Manufacturers Association, 
and it was slanted toward lumber buildings. 
And to some extent, it penalized buildings 
of reinforced concrete, steel, and that sort of 
thing. I was successful in getting the Uniform 
Code at that time adopted. This was about 
’37 or ’38. 

The Uniform Code had been started in 
1925 by a group of building inspectors in 
the Los Angeles area. The representatives of 
industry had been very much interested in 
getting some sort of a building code which 


treated all of the various principal elements 
of building equally because the building 
market was a tremendous market, and the 
competition between the various types of 
materials was very keen and heavy at the time. 
And they would like to see regulations that 
were more sensible. 

The Uniform Building Code was originally 
a group of the standards of the various 
elements of industry, such as concrete and 
steel and wood and masonry (they call it clay 
products), and gypsum, and so on, (that] a 
great many national organizations of industry 
more or less pooled together. They put up 
their money for memberships, which was 
where the money really came from, because 
many of the cities wouldn’t pay a nickel for a 
membership in this organization at that time. 

So we got this code adopted. At the same 
time, we had an obsolete plumbing code. I had 
asked that I be given permission to write a new 
plumbing code for the city of Reno, and it had 
been denied. But the plumbers union heard 
of it, and they lit in my office en masse and 
said that they wanted this done and that they 



48 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


wanted to participate. So we also held, then, 
a series of meetings with the representatives 
of the plumbers union, and gradually, we 
worked out a plumbing code. And then we 
compared that plumbing code with a western 
plumbing code, which was being developed 
in southern California, and used some of the 
parts of the western plumbing code, and got a 
very acceptable code which later on has been 
changed, and they have adopted the national 
plumbing codes that have been developed. 

The inception of this plumbing code is 
interesting in that when I became building 
inspector, two local plumbers asked to be 
examined for a license as master plumber. One 
was Charlie Burke (I don’t know whether you 
want to use those names or not), and the other 
was—I think it’s Record’s partner; I’ll think of 
his name later. These two boys wanted to be 
examined for a master plumber’s license. And 
so a time was set for their examination. 

At that time, the president of an 
organization called the Master Plumbers 
Association of Reno came into my office and 
said, Now, we’ll examine these boys first.” 

And this was news to me, that the Master 
Plumbers organization was going [laughing] 
to examine anybody for a city license, and I 
said, “Well, if you want to examine them, it’s 
all right with me. I’ll tell you what you do. 
You take one of them downstairs and examine 
him, and I’ll start giving the other the city 
examination up here. 

“Oh, we wouldn’t do that.” If they didn’t 
pass his examination, they would not be 
permitted to take the city examination. Well, 
of course, this stopped things cold right there. 
There were some rather hot words exchanged 
before we got through, and this gentleman 
went back to his organization and resigned. 

It developed that what they did for an 
examination, they took the applicants down 
to the basement of the city hail, which was 


rather dark, and they had them wipe a series 
of joints—now, wipe joints at a time when 
lead pipe was used extensively. They’d cut 
angles on a lead pipe, put them together, and 
then you had to take hot solder and make a 
tight joint of it, and also a strong joint. Very 
hard for you to pass that examination with 
Master Plumbers. If they didn’t want you to 
have a license, you didn’t pass. They just said 
your joints were not acceptable and tossed 
them into the discard. So the upshot of it was 
that I just took these two boys in and gave 
them their examination and gave them their 
license. This created a terrific uproar in the 
plumbing industry, particularly among the 
master plumbers. 

I got a copy of the examination the 
master plumbers had passed. And it was not 
an examination at all. It was just a series of 
about ten yes and no questions, which was 
simply a make-believe examination, [didn’t] 
have anything to do with a real examination. 
And they got all to be master plumbers, the 
few that were doing work together at the time. 
And then they decided they’d keep other 
people out from being master plumbers. So 
that, also, helped to stem this desire for a 
plumbing code. 

We did get the plumbing code written, 
and it has developed into an excellent code 
now. We did get the Uniform Building Code 
established, which is, as of today, one of 
the four major building codes in the united 
States. And it is a code that is not industry- 
dominated any more, although industry is 
very important in these codes because their 
developed standards are used back into our 
code year by year. 

As new materials and new ideas and new 
methods come up, they’re included in the 
code in what is called a code changes meeting 
once a year. During the year, there are seven 
committees, one concerned with wood, and 



Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoniing and Planning 


49 


one with steel, and one with concrete, and that 
sort of thing. And hearings are held monthly 
at which members of the industry appear to 
ask for inclusion in the code of new ideas, 
and so forth. These meetings come up with 
a recommendation that this idea be adopted 
or that it not be adopted. And this goes to 
the annual meeting in which all of the cities 
supposedly send representatives, send their 
building inspector or representatives of their 
building departments. I think that, as of 
right now, this code is in use in some twelve 
hundred-odd cities and has a great deal to do 
with the market of about 40,000,000 people 
in building. So it is a factor. The other codes 
that have come to the fore are the BOCA, the 
Building Officials’ Conference of America, 
and the Southern Building Code, and then 
there’s a sort of a splinter branch called the 
New England Building Code. But in general, 
the provisions of any building code—here 
or in Europe or in Japan— are a collection 
of the same standards, the same engineering 
standards with respect to building. Of course, 
Health and Welfare have different aspects in 
different locations of the country. Politics 
do invade the building code from time to 
time. And the existence or the general use of 
a certain type of building material which is 
plentiful in an area also affects the attitude of 
those who write codes. 

But in general, the Uniform Building 
Code is a fine example. It has been used as the 
basis by Toronto in the adoption of a national 
building code for Canada, just as reference 
work, is what it was used for. At one time, the 
State Department wanted to translate it into 
Spanish so that it might be used as a reference 
work for the South American countries. 
Tokyo adopted the Uniform Building Code, 
and then, of course, have built it into their 
own code. But the bones of the code started 
with this Uniform Building Code. 


The first annual meeting of the code 
which I attended, the city, I think, gave me 
twenty-five dollars for expenses. And this 
meeting was in San Francisco. I was much 
younger than I am now and full of beans and 
ideas which were, generally speaking, not too 
(laughing] hot at the time. So I was rather 
vocal at the first meeting I attended. And 
there came to be an attitude, “Well, if he’s so 
smart, let’s let him go to work and see what 
he can do.” 

So I became a member of the board 
of directors at that first meeting. And I 
immediately found that there was fermenting 
an idea that it would be good to get rid of 
the people in Los Angeles who were the 
managing directors for the code and put in 
some people who in this particular effort were 
more cordial toward construction. And this 
campaign (which went on for about three or 
four years, I guess) originated in Portland, 
Oregon with, I guess, the plywood industry 
and the Douglas fir industry, and so forth. !n 
trying to stop this interference, which would 
certainly slow down the development of the 
code, why, I became very much interested in 
code work. And over the years (that’s 1935), in 
1939,1 became president. And I was president 
for two years. And after that, I was still on 
the board for another four or five years. By 
that time, we had passed through many of 
the incidents of travail [laughing] of people 
trying to take charge of the code. I remember 
one incident [that] happened in Reno—a 
couple of incidents that happened in Reno. I 
had two conventions in Reno. And at the first 
convention, which was early, maybe just my 
second or third year, everybody—once they 
got a man from Reno in the organization, 
they thought Reno’d be a swell place to have 
a convention. The first year, we had it at the 
Golden [Hotel], and I found people were hard 
to find. And checking into it, I found out that 



50 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


there were numerous cocktail parties being 
given by members of industry. The lumber 
people had open house. You were perfectly 
welcome, but there were also key people they 
thought they could influence who certainly 
had a ball up there for three or four days. And 
that went for the steel people, the concrete 
people, and what have you. So I decided to 
break that up. We called it political drinking. 
And I made all of the arrangements for the 
entertainment, so that at a certain time, taxis 
came up to the Golden Hotel to take people to 
the Tavern out here, wherever it was we were 
having an affair. And I broke those parties up. 
I went right up and said, “Taxis are waiting. 
Come on, let’s get your clothes on and go.” 
And from then on, I pretty well killed the 
[industry parties]. 

Well, this was another incident of the sort 
of thing they did. They called up three or four 
key people who they thought were influential 
among the building inspectors who attended 
the meetings and would probably be able to 
influence voting for their particular measure 
that they were backing for that year, or 
measures. They called up these few building 
inspectors, said, “Look. Three or four of us 
are going down to Ensenada for a week before 
the convention, and we’ve having cottages. 
Of course, we can’t use all those bedrooms. 
There’s just too much,” and said, “There’s going 
to be a birthday party for so-and-so, and what 
have you, so why don’t you bring your wife, 
come along with us. There’s plenty .of room 
in our cars, too.” 

So here go a big group of people down to 
Ensenada for three, four, five days, and when 
they come back, they certainly have been sold 
a bill of goods. Well, this was going to make it 
pretty difficult to act on some of these matters 
with anything like good sense. So we tried to 
think of what to do. 


Well, another thing that happened about 
that time was that we read in the newspapers 
that representatives of the lumber industry 
were in Phoenix and that they were drawing 
a new building code in Phoenix, and we knew 
it was going to be slanted toward lumber to 
the exclusion of all other building materials 
[laughing], if it was possible. 

So we decided that we would subscribe to 
a clipping service (cost us $600 a year at that 
time, and that was a Lot of money), in which 
we would find out where these men who 
were well known, the men of industry, who 
went to conventions (they went to BOCA’s 
convention, Southern Building convention, 
and so forth, just the same as they did to 
ours), find out where they were going and 
what they were doing so that we could be 
better prepared at our annual meeting to deal 
with them. And this worked out very well. We 
knew pretty well what they were promoting 
and who they had on the string, and we could 
work on those people, too. It was very helpful. 

This was the time of World War II. And 
there were controls [which] went into effect 
on building materials, and this was duck 
soup for industry. For instance, the wood 
people came and said, “Now, we want to 
raise the working stresses on our material 
to conserve wood because a great deal of 
temporary construction is being done. And 
it doesn’t have to be as strong and sturdy as 
construction which is intended for long-term 
use and the habitation of people.” 

So those things were adopted temporarily, 
and they’re still in the code. As a matter of fact, 
they have been increased a little bit since then 
on the theory that the engineers are becoming 
more knowledgeable about tying buildings 
up. You can build of rather thin materials, of 
relatively weak materials— we’ll say not weak 
materials, but the small size materials— and if 



Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoniing and Planning 


51 


they are properly braced at proper intervals, 
you can have a relatively strong structure. 

And the development of earthquake- 
resisting construction, which started with 
the 1906 earthquake in San Francisco, the 
desire for resistance to a lateral force (which 
includes wind and tornado) built up rather 
rapidly A great many organizations among 
the engineers were studying ways and means 
of building buildings that would resist 
successfully the action of earthquakes and 
of wind, Whichever of the two would be the 
stronger. Sometimes wind is stronger than 
earthquake. 

So this led, also, to the districting of the 
United States according to the frequency 
and severity of earthquakes. And, of course, 
California became a type three district 
because they have quite an earthquake history. 
This portion of Nevada was also type three. 
The eastern portion of Nevada is type two, 
and I think part of Nevada is type one. And I 
posed the question at one time, “what do you 
do if you’re trying to build a school building 
which requires adequate lateral force, and it 
straddles the line [laughing] between type one 
and type two?” I was very unpopular. It was a 
silly question anyhow. 

We have had in Nevada an earthquake 
out by Winnemucca, about sixty miles, I 
think, northeast of Winnemucca, which had 
as high as a thirty-foot drop [from] one side 
of the dirt to the other. And part of this rift 
went through a ranchers’ back yard so that 
his house was on the lower side, and his 
[laughing] comfort” facilities were on the 
upper side [laughing]. 

They had an earthquake in Fallon (I wish I 
had the dates for these things in mind) which 
disturbed the ground to the extent that no 
longer could they irrigate because the slope 
of the ground had been changed. And then 


there were cracks in the ground. Some of 
those cracks were as much as two feet wide 
and two feet deep. And actually, no water 
could cross over them. We had fences that 
were as much as five feet out of line, power 
poles that were a great deal out of line. And 
this is true in Fallon because wherever the 
ground is soft, loamy, and you have a serious 
earthquake, it just shakes all over the place. 
A serious earthquake in hard ground full of 
boulders and clay, and so forth, does not shake 
anywhere near as badly. These are two of the 
serious earthquakes we had in this area, and 
two of the reasons that this area is considered 
in type three. 

During this war, too, there was a great 
deal of interest in building codes, and our 
conventions were held from San Diego 
clear to Canada, yearly conventions. And, 
of course, I was in the middle of those 
conventions because of my interest. I was a 
worker in those days. I’m not such a worker 
any more [laughing]. 

We had one convention, I remember, in 
Salt Lake City at which time there was quite a 
fuss with the Federal Housing Administration 
because they wanted us to change some parts 
of our code to conform more closely to the 
federal. As a result of that, when we had a 
convention in Santa Barbara at the Biltmore 
Hotel there, the [federal] government sent 
out one of their top code men, a man named 
[George] Johnson. The American Standards 
Association sent out one of their top men 
to make speeches to our organization about 
cooperation with the government in the 
establishment of a national building code. 

Well, we weren’t for that. We had 
established a building code which was doing 
quite well and we didn’t want to give it up. 
So Mr. [Hal] Coiling, who was the secretary- 
manager of our organization, called me and 



52 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


he said, “We want you to make the keynote 
speech at this convention, and if you can, 
cover as many of the points that are going 
to be covered by our visitors as possible, and 
do it first.” 

“Well,” I said, “sure, I’ll do it. That’s duck 
soup for me. I’ll be happy to do it.” 

But I didn’t get around to doing any work 
on it, much as the same as I don’t get around 
doing, too much work on [laughing] talking 
to you. I told Ruth, “I’ll make an outline here 
pretty soon.” 

So I didn’t. And we got down to the hotel, 
and I thought, “Well, I’ll take a couple hours 
off and make an outline here.” But I didn’t 
get a couple of hours off. That was one of the 
conventions where these Portland people 
were rather active, and we had a very hot 
board of directors meeting, finally, and we 
tossed them out. And this was very interesting 
and very pleasant, enjoyable activity, and I 
didn’t get any work done. 

So on the fourth day of the convention, 
the speeches were to be made after the 
breakfast meeting, which was to be about 
nine or nine-thirty in the morning. I got a 
few bites of breakfast, and I said to my wife, 
“Now, I’ll run over to the room and make a 
little outline here.” 

Well, I got over to the room, and, “Knock, 
knock” on the door, and here are these two 
characters. They wanted to talk to me. And 
they said, “Now, Mr. Ferris, we would like to 
be sure that we don’t have any clashing of ideas 
if possible. We’d like to give you an idea of 
what we want to say and hope that you won’t 
contradict too much.” 

And I said, “Well, I haven’t done anything 
so far. I was just sitting down to think over a 
talk.” 

One of them said, “We aren’t going to 
talk. We have spent our time here writing 
our speeches, and we’re going to read them 


because we don’t want to get crossed up 
between the American Standards Association 
and the Department of Commerce, certainly. 
And we were hoping that you would also not 
get crossed up with us.” Well, there was some 
talk, and they left, not feeling too happy about 
the thing. 

By that time, it was time for me to start 
talking, so I just had to go back to the meeting. 
And I got up in my slaphappy fashion, and I 
talked for about twenty minutes. And later, 
some of the men came around to me and 
said that this was one of the most interesting 
talks they ever heard and that it certainly 
pinpointed the role of the building code and 
the action of the building code in the industry. 
And these other two men, they got up and 
read their speeches, and nothing ever came 
of it, nationally. 

But I got to thinking, “I must’ve made a 
whale of a speech.” So I said to Mr. Colling, 
“Will you transcribe that speech and send me 
a copy of it?” 

That I should never have done. Of all 
the rambling speeches you ever heard! And 
people were laughing all the way through it, 
and this was a serious speech! [Laughing] But 
they thought it was great. 

But it did accomplish this, that it stopped 
this attempt by FHA and the Department of 
Commerce to write—or, I don’t know whether 
it stopped it, but it was one of the things that 
stopped their attempt to write a national 
building code. With the four sections of our 
country [it would have created difficulties]. 
The Northern section, and so forth, is wood; 
the Southern section is concrete; middle 
section (Colorado, and so forth) is all 
masonry and concrete block, cinder block; 
and Southern countries, where again, it’s 
wood largely. 

By the way, speaking of the southern 
section, there was an incident down there in 



Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoniing and Planning 


53 


that the managing director of the American 
Iron and Steel Institute wrote a building code. 
And I want to tell you that it was all metal lath 
and metal studs for gypsum plaster. And at the 
convention in Fresno, I believe it was, at the 
end of that convention, he had been writing 
this code for quite a while, and he brought 
with him the proofs on long sheets of paper 
like this [gesture], and about [laughing] about 
that thick [two inches] I 

At the conclusion of the convention, he 
suggested that my wife and I go with him 
and his wife to Yosemite for a week. Well, it 
so happened that we had been intending to 
do that anyhow. So we went up there for this 
week, and we found this man trying to pay 
our railroad fare and trying to pay our bus 
fare, which we didn’t stand for for a minute, 
and we immediately got the idea that this was 
a little sales jaunt. So we told this gentleman 
to forget it, that we weren’t interested in being 
sold a bill of goods. And he wanted me to read, 
anyhow, the proofs of his code and to give 
him a criticism on it. And from then on, he 
played bridge and what have you, and it was 
very pleasant. We became quite good friends. 

Well, in coming back, we drove them back 
to Reno, and he was going to stay here and 
play some nickel machines (he loved to play 
some of the nickel machines). We drove them 
back to Reno, and on passing a tamale factory 
out there on Second Street, I said to my wife, “I 
think that it’d be nice. Let’s get a dozen of these 
tamales. These Eastern people probably have 
never had them, and they may be interested 
in them”. Well, they weren’t. They didn’t like 
them at all. They ate what they had to and 
wished they hadn’t had to eat any of them. 

Well, I didn’t read this man’s bunch of junk 
he had [laughing], about this thick [gesture], 
and I finally got a telegram from him, said, “I 
ate your damn tamales. Why don’t you read 
my code?” [laughing) 


Well, I did read his code. And I did tell 
him that I thought that he’d gone all out for 
steel, and that if he was going to successfully 
get the code adopted and into operation that 
he ought to tone some of it down, which he 
did. These are the sort of things that kept 
coming up all the time. And industry is always 
digging at this code. 

It was while I was president, ’39, ’40, ’41, 
that the lumber people asked the code changes 
committee to approve a change which said, 
“All structural lumber must be grade marked.” 
Now, that means that you can say in a code 
that, “No. 1 Douglas fir is good for 1,200 
pounds a square inch, and No. 2 is good for 
1,100 [pounds],” and—different strengths of 
lumber, depending on the amount of knots 
and shakes and cracks, and so forth, that come 
into the lumber. And the building inspectors 
cannot, as a general thing, go out to a load of 
lumber and determine whether it’s top grade 
lumber and should be used at the designed 
strengths that the engineers have used in 
designing the building. They can’t go grade 
lumber. It’s a specialty. It just seemed to them 
that this was real good. 

So it went across and was adopted 
and printed. I sell, shortly thereafter, I was 
approached by, I guess, members of the FBI 
who said that they wanted me to sign a permit 
for the people in Los Angeles to turn over 
our books to them. And I wanted to know 
why, and they said they couldn’t tell me why, 
but that they would appreciate [it] if I would 
do it because it would be simpler that way 
[laughing]. 

So I did, and they got the books. And it 
developed that many of the smaller dealers 
throughout the United States had been 
approached and told that in order to get 
grade-marked lumber without any trouble, 
right immediately when they needed it, 
they should join the National Lumber 



54 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Manufacturers Association. And, of course, 
there are dues connected with this. I don’t 
know to what extent those dues actually were, 
but I heard it was [a] percent [age] of the gross, 
which would have been a terrific thing. 

Well, the result was that the government 
took the National Lumber Manufacturers 
Association to court, and they were fined 
and told that as long as that sentence was 
in our code, they might not be a member 
of the Uniform Building Code Association 
(it’s called the International Association of 
Building Officials, actually). 

So since we need the lumber people in 
our code to fight steel and concrete and all the 
rest of these people when they come up with 
something that is their pet and we don’t have 
enough smart people to debate with these 
men from industry (they’re top men), [and] 
we needed them, we took out the line, and it’s 
never been put back. 

About that time also, we began to hold 
state conventions with the idea of promoting 
chapters of building officials in areas who 
could meet periodically, discuss some of 
their problems, and in case they needed an 
interpretation of code or in case they had a 
new clause that would be beneficial in the code, 
they would communicate with headquarters 
and we’d get the benefit of those studies, also, 
besides our committee studies that were going 
on. And we held these meetings in California, 
Utah, Colorado, Oregon, Washington, British 
Columbia, and Saskatchewan. And at those 
meetings, why, we explained the workings of 
the code and invited questions and suggested 
the format for establishing a chapter of 
building officials from their area. This was 
very successful. There are chapters all over. 
Southern Nevada has one, as a matter of fact, 
and so does northern Nevada. These chapters 
have been very beneficial in teaching the 
building officials how to use the provisions of 


the code because the code says, “You shall do 
this,” or, “You shall not do it.” And you cannot 
write rules of that kind, that are all-inclusive, 
that cover every case. 

There must be give and take in the 
operation of a code, and particularly with 
reference to condemnations. You could get 
borderline cases in which you could say, 
“This building should be condemned,” and 
the owner-said, “I can put it in shape so that 
you can accept it,” and somewhere along the 
line somebody has to come to a reasonable 
decision which promotes growth in an area 
instead of stopping it. And the building 
officials, in the early stages, when they just 
read this thing and tried to enforce it as it was 
read, they were hurting construction in some 
of their cities. 

We had several instances in Rena in 
those early days of condemnations (in which 
the fire chief had a part, too), and it was a 
question of whether it was possible, for a 
reasonable amount of money, to make this 
structure conform to the code reasonably 
well. Reno had so many buildings from about 
Washington Street down to beyond Center, 
beyond Lake even, that did not conform to the 
new codes and that did pose a hazard (as they 
had come to understand hazards), that many 
of the remodelings of buildings in these areas 
did not—were not remodeled completely up 
to the code because this was economically 
not feasible. Rut they did improve existing 
conditions, particularly with the spread of fire, 
which is what we were interested in. 

In these old buildings, they all had party 
walls, it seems. Every time you built a wall, 
you also built it so you could sell half of it to 
the guy next door when he built. And then 
they would want to combine offices. They 
didn’t have enough space in one building, 
so they’d cut a hole through the wall and use 
offices in the next building to add to the offices 



Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoniing and Planning 


55 


in their building for some tenant, with the 
result that there was a good communication 
between the various buildings in case of a fire. 

Also, they did not use fire stops, as we 
understand then’, in a building. Fire stops 
mean that the little channels in which hot 
gases can travel through a building and start 
a fire someplace else are blocked by running 
into, we’ll say, just a two-inch block of wood 
that’s nailed into place and stops that channel. 
We do that in between joists over partitions. 
Between every joist, there is a fire stop to keep 
the fire from going over the top. And I have 
seen instances of the transmission of fire. 

One of them that was hard to believe at 
the time was when there was a fire in the B. D. 
Billinghurst school. It started in the basement 
around the furnace room. And it burned in 
that area and was stopped with a fairly small 
amount of damage, other than water damage 
(they did a lot of water damage). But that 
fire broke out in the roof I And that building 
had fire stops—all of the fire stops that the 
code called for. I was the architect for the 
building, and I wanted to know how come 
that fire got from the basement to the roof. 
We had steel columns supporting floor and 
roof construction, and they’re about six inches 
square. And right in here [gesture], there’s a 
little slot about two or three inches by five 
inches on each side of this steel column. In 
those little slots I did not put fire stops. I didn’t 
think of it. Those hot gases went up those very 
small openings and started a fire in the roof. 

Arid another thing that we started 
doing—in those days, where we had no 
ventilation, particularly, other than window 
ventilation in hotels, it was customary to put 
a movable sash, called a transom, over the 
top of the door, so that when you went to 
your hotel room, you could open a window 
and you could open that transom, and you 
could get ventilation back and forth through 


your room. In the case of a corner room, you 
wouldn’t have to do that. 

Well, there was [a fire at) a big hotel in 
Chicago. A number of people were killed 
on the upper floors. And the investigation 
revealed the fact that they were killed by 
carbon monoxide gas, that these gases went 
up vertical shafts that weren’t properly 
insulated from the rest of the building, got 
into corridors. And they traveled at high 
speed. Somebody once figured those gases 
must’ve been going at around fifty miles 
an hour from the pressures. This is just the 
pressures from wood gases. As they build 
up so much gas, it just shoves it out. And 
they went through the transoms, these open 
transoms, and the people were asphyxiated, 
almost immediately. This stuff acts real fast. 

So this is an illustration of building code 
work. From there on, no transoms over the 
doors in hotels. But you had to kill a lot of 
people before you found it out. 

In the fire of the Cotton Club in Boston, 
I went back there on that fire. And the fire 
marshal told us that there were three men 
sitting at a bar in the Cotton Club with their 
elbows on the bar, and that they were still 
sitting there, dead, when the fire had been 
put out. They hadn’t fallen down, but they 
had been killed so fast. And I have heard 
that rigor mortis can, under some situations, 
occur almost instantly. Anyhow, he said those 
three men were sitting there just as they were 
at the time the fire started. And that fire had 
to do with a lot of painted burlap, too, and 
stuff. The gases must’ve been tremendous in 
volume and very fast. 

Well, I started to talk about these 
conventions. We made quite a thing of them. 
I remember that in Victoria [B. C.], they had 
their senator from their town (and senators 
in Canada at that time were appointed for 
life—or elected for life; I don’t know which), 



56 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


and this was a very personable gentleman. 
He came, he greeted us. And this was one of 
my toughest assignments, is to answer the 
greetings of the governor and the mayor and 
the senator, and so forth. They come down 
and they give you a flowery greeting of some 
kind that they’ve been using for about ten 
years and they know every word of it, and 
each one of them has a different approach. 
And then an adequate response has to be 
made by the people who’re in charge of the 
convention. And by the time I got through 
with these things, I had several rather 
adequate responses. I could get up there with 
a big smile on my pan and kid the life out of 
them! But at first, I want to tell you that that 
was not an easy thing for me to do. 

They pretty nearly turned the militia out 
for us in Victoria. They lit up the government 
buildings at night (and it’s rather costly, too, 
in the way of electricity). They took real good 
care of us for four or five days there at the 
Victoria hotel. 

One little incident on one of our trips— 
we were going to the big city to the north of 
Victoria, Vancouver. The first time we went 
up there, the city of Vancouver had an old 
hotel with an English dining room, beautiful 
woodwork up to the ceiling, waiters dressed 
in tails, and so forth. The last time we went 
up, they were in a new building that they had 
built. Now, this new building, [a] multistory, 
modern hotel, was to replace their original 
hotel. But when the war hit, the Canadian 
railroads who were building the hotel and 
who had supposedly ten percent of their 
income set aside for building, they didn’t have 
that income set aside any more, and so the 
hotel was built, but there were no furnishings 
in for several years, I think three or four years. 
The building was there and they never used 
it. And they had just gotten it furnished, and 
they were using it on this trip. 


Well, you had to have red tickets and one 
thing and another to get meat in those days. 
Everything was rationed. And we got up to 
Canada, and we had been paying anywhere 
up to fifteen dollars for a dinner for four of 
us. The Codings and ourselves were on this 
particular trip. And we got up to the hotel in 
Victoria. The mayor of the city greeted us and 
told us that that night, he would host a dinner 
for us. As I discovered in Canada, they had 
steaks and anything you wanted. We couldn’t 
get ’em. And I said to my wife, I said, “I’m 
going to kill ’em at this dinner!” 

And we got the menu, and here—here it 
was, a great, big, long menu. I really went to 
town! I had steak, everything you could think 
of. And when I got through, [laughing] my 
wife said, “Did you see this? 

I said, “What?” 

Down at the bottom, it said, “Dinner, 
$1.25” [laughing]. 

Now, the next time that we went up, and 
we went to Vancouver, and we went into this 
new hotel I’ve been telling you about, dinner 
was five dollars. And that was only a short 
time later. 

At that time, too, you could buy plumbing 
goods, toilets, lavatories, bathtubs, all that 
sort of thing, made by the same companies 
that make them in this country. Well, you 
couldn’t buy them in this country. You could 
buy them up there. 

One of the things that I thought was 
interesting, I was doing a job during that 
period for the Nevada Club. And they wanted 
to put in new restrooms—lots of toilets, 
lavatories, and that sort of thing, and also, 
the cast iron soil pipe that went with these 
installations. It was very difficult to come by. 
It was barred, as a matter of fact. And they 
bought this material in Los Angeles. But 
the people who sold the material would not 
deliver it. You had to come and get it. So they 



Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoniing and Planning 


57 


bought it; they got it; they took it to a trucking 
firm across Los Angeles, wherever it was. 
The trucking firm delivered it up here, and 
they unloaded it and put it in the basement 
of the Nevada Club. After that, the owners of 
the Nevada Club— there were two of them, 
Sullivan and Fitzgerald—Fitzgerald would 
come down and he would count the cast iron 
fittings, and he would count his lavatories 
and other equipment, and hed do it every 
morning. I had quite a few men working down 
there. And one of them said to me, “what’s 
this so-and-so think, that we’ re going to steal 
his stuff?” 

And I said, “I don’t know.” 

“Well,” he said, “this is going to cost him!” 

You know, every time I came down there 
to make an inspection, there would be three 
or four carpenters with a set of blueprints 
laying on the ground. They’d be looking down 
at them, smoking, talking about fishing and 
one thing and another [laughing]. A couple 
of fellows over here’d be stalling. It must have 
cost him thousands of dollars in labor. They 
just slowed it down like nobody’s business. 

These were conditions during the war 
times. It was hard, nor instance, the Bonanza 
Club, it used to be called the Northern Club. 
And they decided to make a supper club out 
of it. He’s one of the owners—or perhaps 
the owner of the Ponderosa now. He and 
his partners developed the Bonanza Club. 
And they had everything under the sun that 
you put into a supper club. Now, where they 
bought it—! don’t know where they bought it. 
But they had it. And we built it, right smack 
under the noses of the federal inspectors. 
Ultimately, I understand that they arrested 
him, took him down, him and his pals, and 
took them down to court in Las Vegas, and 
that he was fined $1,500, which was just a drop 
in the bucket, as far as they [were concerned]. 
That didn’t mean anything. And the Bonanza 


Club was quite one of the eating places here 
in town. 

Oh, there were so many things in 
connection with these conventions. 

We were going to talk about the Variance 
Board, for one thing, and the Planning Board. 
Now, this Planning Board, I told you how I 
became building inspector, didn’t I? And I was 
appointed to the Planning Board at that time 
as a representative of the city. At that time, 
I pushed three things: a zoning ordinance, 
parking meters, and setting aside land east of 
the hospital [Washoe Medical] for industry. 

The representative of the Southern Pacific, 
Ray Marks, told me that if we would make 
land available for industry, he had a notion 
the city might buy some of this land and 
sell it back to people that wanted to come; 
or if the zoning ordinance were adopted, we 
could zone it for industry (which it is now, 
by the way). If that happened, the Southern 
Pacific Railroad would come across the river 
at Sparks with trackage and go into this area 
wherever it was economically feasible to do 
so. Well, T didn’t get anyplace with that at all. 

And the matter of the parking meters was 
simply—it was going to discourage people 
from ever coming to Reno, and they wouldn’t 
hear of it at all—no parking meters. 

The zoning ordinance was coupled with 
my work with the building code, to get some 
sort of orderly enforcement for the building 
code, because I kept running into things that 
the fire department wanted to condemn. 
They could never condemn anything. An 
owner would appear before the council and 
complain and say he’d fix it up, and they’d ask 
me, “Is that possible in the building code?” 

And I said, “Yes, it’s possible, but will he 
do it?” 

Well, they didn’t care whether will he do 
it or not. If it was possible with the building 
code, it was not going to be condemned. But 



58 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


with the zoning ordinance, we could very 
soon zone a lot of those things out of business, 
and we could sure keep them from going 
in. But again, I didn’t get support for it, and 
perhaps they were right. It might have been 
too early in the town’s development to go into 
those things. However, it wasn’t too much 
later after we adopted the Uniform Building 
Code that they did adopt a zoning ordinance. 

And then there became a planning board 
for Sparks in addition to the one for Reno, 
and this wasn’t working very well, so they 
had a county planning board, as it is now 
constituted. I understand Carson has a city 
planning board. However, Carson is a whole 
county now [laughing]—maybe two, three 
counties. I was amazed the other day, driving 
along the lake [Tahoe], to see a “Carson City 
Limit” sign up there. 

Well, when I left the city in 1945 Cl 
took a leave of absence in 1945), I got off 
the planning board. The reason that I took 
that leave of absence in ’45, I had been 
doing architectural work and the building 
inspection work. My architectural work, I 
did at night. And I was working until twelve 
and sometimes one and two o’clock at night 
out on the back porch of our little place there 
on Thoma Street. The next thing I knew, I 
thought my glasses were dirty. I couldn’t see 
through them very well. They were fuzzy. And 
I’d take them of f and clean them, put them 
on; I’d take them off and clean them, and 
they were still fuzzy. Well, what developed, 
had happened, that I had thyroid deficiency 
development from exhaustion. This (was] 
about five years that I did this. One of the 
symptoms of this thyroid deficiency was a lack 
of coordination, muscular coordination. The 
doctor told me that this simply meant that at 
night, when my eyes’d become a little tired, 
that they stopped coordinating too well. And 
so I thought that I had stuff on my glasses. 


That’s when I couldn’t write any more. I don’t 
write well. And the reason I don’t, it started 
with that lack of my—I used to write a good 
hand— muscular coordination. Couldn’t hit 
a golf ball to save ray soul. So I took a leave of 
absence, and my business increased so much 
that I never did go back to the work at all. 

During that time, and for a number of 
years afterwards, I was a member of the 
variance board. And we had at that time a 
zoning ordinance to guide us, which has been 
doctored and added to and deducted from to 
the present, when it’s a fairly comprehensive 
and workable zoning ordinance, an ordinance, 
by the way, in which they can give or take 
almost according to whim. 

An illustration of that is the fact that when 
a client of mine wanted to put in a grinding 
plant for spectacles, eyeglasses, which is 
quiet, has no fumes, no noise, is a very 
small operation, and there are no possible 
objections to it in the area in which we wanted 
to put it in. But the code in that area says that 
you may not do manufacturing. So they then 
interpreted the code to mean that eyeglasses, 
which were ground, were manufactured. 
They’re processed. So here, I got into a nice 
big hassle with the board over the definition 
of manufacturing and processing. Well, a 
man buys glass, all he has to do is to grind to 
a prescription. That’s processing it. He didn’t 
manufacture anything; he changed it. But 
that’s where they refused him permission to 
put in his plant. He could go over and sell 
eyeglasses, and he could adjust them, and 
all that sort of thing. He could have a store 
there in this zoning, but he couldn’t grind 
them there, In other instances, such as Eagle 
Thrifty, for instance, they can find ways and 
means to interpret things so that progress can 
go ahead in spite of, perhaps, the objections 
of some people who may not even be there 
in two years. 



Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoniing and Planning 


59 


Well, I was with the zoning board—I was 
chairman of that variance board for a number 
of years. An amusing incident happened 
when the art gallery wanted to extend their 
building to the south with a small addition, 
and the people next door, who would be 
probably thirty feet away from the building, 
as extended, perhaps more, came to a variance 
board meeting to protest the building of this 
addition to the art gallery Now, nothing could 
be more innocuous and quiet than an addition 
to an art gallery But these people made the 
statement that if we allowed them to build this 
gallery, they knew that the gallery would then 
have to give dances for teenagers in order to 
raise money to pay for it, and that they would 
have an orchestra and theyd have kids out 
there drinking beer and shouting, and that 
they had their bedroom on that side of their 
house, and they simply couldn’t sleep. 

Well, this lady, she made quite a long talk 
about it. And I finally got her shut up. A friend 
of theirs who was with them got up and said 
that he agreed with them, and I said, “What’s 
your objection?” 

He said, “I don’t have any objection. These 
people are friends of mine. If they don’t like 
it, I don’t like it!” 

So this went on. There were some people 
from the audience, of course, from the art 
gallery, that wanted to talk about it. 

And the reason, by the way, that this lady 
said they would have to give dances to raise 
money, she said the judge had allowed them 
to take some money out of their (this is a 
tax-free thing)—out of their investments to 
pay for the building, and she knew they had 
to pay that back. And so they’d have to get 
the money by dances, and so forth, and all 
these kids and their drinking, and so forth, 
would raise Cain. 

All of a sudden, the man got up and 
said, “Mr. Ferris, would you please ask these 


people to talk louder? My wife is very deaf” 
[laughing]. 

These are the things that happen. People 
come to these meetings, and some have 
legitimate objections and they are vocal; they 
can tell you what they mean, and others just 
wander on. Then they bring their lawyers. 
The lawyer will make a presentation. And the 
other side will say something about it. And the 
lawyer will get up and say, “Now, in rebuttal, 
I would like to say—.” And right there, the 
gavel comes down. 

Monk Ferris says, “All we want are the 
facts, just the facts, ma’am [laughing]. And 
we’ll decide what we’ll do with it. And we 
don’t need any further arguments from you. 
You’ve told us what you think about it. We’ll 
decide the merits of the case.” 

Oh, brother, did that make ’em mad! 

And one night, I remember one of our 
boys, Pat—well, what do I try to remember 
names for? He made a remark that somebody 
was silly, and that sort of thing. I’ve forgotten 
the wording and the remark. And the reporter 
who always attended our meetings immediately 
grabbed his pencil and paper and started 
to write, and I said, “Wait a minute!” I said, 
“You’re not going to report that remark.” I said, 
“That was a slip. That’s something that very 
rarely ever happens in our meetings, and we’re 
not going to have that kind of report go out.” 

He said, “I’m here to report the news, and 
it’s going out.” 

I said, “And so are you! And you’ll never 
be back.” 

He said, “You can’t put me out!” 

“Well,” I said, “try me!” 

And the upshot of it was he didn’t print 
this particular thing. And it wouldn’t’ve done 
us a bit of good. It would’ve seemed that this 
was the way things went constantly. 

So we had quite a lot of fun, I suppose. 
Then we began to have requests for signs on 



60 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


buildings in residential districts, and it was 
all—it was really a lot of small stuff. And when 
Baker became mayor, he said he thought they 
should have some new blood on the board, 
and he allowed me to resign, or else.. So that 
finished the variance board. But I enjoyed that 
work for all those years. 

And then I have been chairman of the 
Board of Appeals for the city of Reno for a 
number of years. We haven’t had too many 
requests for action. But when we do, we 
have lawyers, we have real bitter hearings. 
I remember one when an automobile man 
was building a new garage, a million-dollar 
building. His insurance people told him he 
did not need to put sprinklers in the building, 
and the city building department said he must 
put sprinklers in the building, and the code 
requires, also, that sprinklers be put in the 
building. 

So they appealed from the decision of the 
building department. And with their lawyer 
and their insurance agents from Sacramento, 
we had a hearing. The insurance people said 
that all sprinklers would do in a garage was to 
float the gasoline and oils around and spread 
the fire all over the place. And I said, “What 
gasoline? And what oils? The gasolines and 
the oils are in tanks underneath the ground. 
And they never have more cars in the place 
than they can work on. So three or four cars 
with a small tank of gasoline, well-covered 
and taken care of, is not loose. [If] a fire starts, 
the sprinkler goes on, and perhaps puts it out, 
immediately. So where are the gases and the 
oils to be run around with water from the 
sprinklers?” 

Well, they had sold the owner of the 
building a bill of goods that this is what would 
happen, and he was very bitterly insistent that 
we were simply making it a dangerous thing 
in his building. 


So I went to the Board of Fire Underwriters 
of the Pacific. Their engineer was a man who 
had been in building code work for the 
board for a number of years before, and I 
knew him very well. And I asked him what 
their experience was with these sprinklers in 
garages. He says, “Excellent, just excellent. 
We like them. Insurance men in Sacramento, 
trying to sell this bill of insurance, didn’t want 
to have to knock down their price, which 
they would have to do if they gave credit for 
sprinklers. So that wound up—we made them 
put the sprinklers in, but this man has ever 
since felt that he was made to throw $30,000 
down the drain, and he never will think 
anything else. 

That’s the kind of thing, however, that 
always came before the Board of Appeals, 
always a complete difference of opinion 
which was never changed. They went away, 
both sides, convinced that they were right, 
just the same, and that we arbitrarily set the 
rule that they had to follow. It was not a very 
rewarding job. 

I don’t think of another one. Clyde Mast 
was on one side and so was (walker] Boudwin, 
and Clarence K. Bath and I were on the other 
side of the question, and we never, ourselves, 
were unanimous in what we should do. But 
it is quite true, that in the administration of 
a zoning ordinance or a building code, that 
there are always items (which) arise which 
require judgment. You cannot write a hard 
and fast rule which can apply completely to 
every little variation that can come up. Some 
of these people want to just read the book 
and say, “That’s it.” And this does not promote 
economic development; this slows it down. 
Well, that was the variance board. 

How did we work out our relationships 
between the city council and these appeals 
boards and with the people who come in with 



Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoniing and Planning 


61 


their appeals? well, there seems to be always a 
political undertone to a disagreement about 
zoning, about condemnation, and about very 
restrictive requirements of a building code, 
and it usually winds up with the owners going 
to their councilman and putting the pressure 
on him. 

Now, we were going to condemn a 
building over on Peavine Street that was 
owned by a lawyer whose name again I do 
not remember. And it should have been 
condemned. I went over there, and bums, who 
probably were drunk as often as they could get 
drunk, would have a little room, and there was 
a lock on the door, a small cylinder lock. I had 
to fit a key just right to open it. Then a very 
narrow hail went out this way [gesture] with 
two or three breaks in the hall through these 
wooden buildings, two or three of them that 
had been put together. It was quite possible 
that in case of a fire, some of these people 
would probably never even wake up. So it was 
to be condemned. 

This lawyer appeared before the city 
council and said that they would never 
condemn that building, and that he would 
never do anything to improve it. It had been 
there for a long time, and it was going to 
stay there, tie had a couple of friends on 
the council with whom he was, I suppose, 
involved in business ways or political ways. 
And the result was that it never came to a 
vote at the council. And this is the way a great 
many of these things are handled. They die. 
This is the easiest way to do it. There’s no use 
getting up and having a great big hassle about 
it. They die. 

flow, I remember when they were trying 
to fire me as building inspector. The plumbers 
came before the council and said that unless 
I was the architect (I was doing architectural 
work at night)—unless I was the architect for 


a job, it was very difficult to get a permit. And 
William “Rags” Justi, who was a councilman, 
had a brother-in-law, Jones, who had been 
building inspector before me, and he wanted 
to put him back in. But Jones had been let out 
when I was appointed. 

Well, see, August Frohlich was the mayor. 
And he was a good friend of mine. And the 
result of this meeting with— oh, Ruth had a 
tremendous lot of paper clippings of “Building 
Inspector Defends Himself,” “Plumbing 
Inspector Attacked.” And they had headlines 
in the paper. She had a whole gob of this stuff. 
I threw it away. 

The upshot of it was that nothing was ever 
proved in anyway. I was never acquitted. And 
there was a board of appeals, and one of the 
plumbers on that board (this was a board of 
the plumbers; that would be it) —one of the 
plumbers on that board resigned. And August 
Frohlich did not appoint a successor, with the 
result they never met to consider the matter 
and report back to the council. And it just 
died right there. That’s one of the ways that 
they handle these things. 

Of course, another way they handle them 
nowadays is go to court. Rut there was very 
little going to court in those days. Things were, 
“Let’s don’t get ourselves Gut on any limbs,” 
“Let’s don’t get into any big fights. If it looks 
like you can’t get any place with this thing 
without a tot of trouble, let’s just forget it, 
leave it.” And there was a lot of that went on. 

How about the corruption issue? Well, 
now, when I became plumbing inspector, I 
went out on one j ob the first time, right early in 
the job. I went out on one job that was having 
some additions made to their plumbing and 
made my inspection. And when you make 
an inspection, you’re supposed to put up a 
red card that you tack on in a place where 
it’s visible, and it says that you inspected this, 



62 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


that, -and the other thing, so much money 
was paid, and it’s passed, okay I found one 
of those red cards shoved up in between the 
casing of a window and the wall, in the little 
crack there, and it was shoved in. I picked it 
down and looked at it, and I was curious, so I 
went and looked for the permit that had been 
issued which shows that the money had been 
deposited with the city. And no permit had 
ever been issued. I found a number of those 
instances in which there was evidence—this 
was not evidence. This is a fact, what I found 
there. There was a receipt for money, and no 
permit was issued. It was only five dollars, or 
some such matter. But there were a number 
of instances like that in which, quite evidently, 
inspections had been made and money 
collected, and it had never been turned over 
to the city. 

Did I see people attempting to buy 
variances or zoning changes? Never, never 
have I found anyone attempting to influence 
the board by means of a present of any kind— 
money or percolators, or anything else—in 
all the years I was there. As a matter of fact, 
we never did have anything big enough and 
important enough to justify such an approach. 

I can remember one thing that happened. 
When we were applying for the—now, this 
is as an architect—we were applying for 
the job of designing the big auditorium out 
there on South Virginia, the Coliseum, and 
we had three votes, I believe, at the time, out 
of five. And my partner had run for Washoe 
County commissioner against the man 
who beat him and became the president of 
the committee to select an architect for the 
[laughing] Coliseum. That had been A rather 
bitter campaign. He would wage that kind of 
a campaign. 

So one of the men of the board, who 
was supposed to be on the other side of the 
fence (he was a city councilman), came to 


see me. And he was a man who had been 
in the flooring business, floor tile. And he 
had put down a floor at St. Mary’s Hospital, 
where I was the architect, while he was in that 
business. And I turned the floor down, made 
him take it up and do it over with the specified 
materials and glues, and what have you. 

So he came in to see me, said that he 
knew I was an applicant as architect for the 
new Coliseum, And he said, “You know, you 
cost me $500 when you made me tear that 
floor up there at St. Mary’s.” And then a little 
later, he said, “You know, I’m going to be 
running for city council shortly, and this is 
pretty expensive.” And it was quite evident 
that he was waiting for me to offer him some 
money. And at that time charges were flying 
around that architects had given Cadillacs to 
members of this committee in order to get the 
job. Well, a $5,000 Cadillac—in order to get 
that kind of a job, your profit’d be gone. It’s 
absolutely silly! But this guy, he wanted five 
hundred or a thousand dollars, and evidently, 
he would vote for me if he got it. 

Well, I’m silly. I don’t do that sort of thing. 
So we didn’t get the job. And that’s all right. 
We’ve got plenty [laughing] of work anyhow. 

But I don’t know, of my own knowledge, 
of any great deal of corruption in Reno’s 
government. I know that Mike Knox, who was 
a member of the city council, was absolutely 
incorruptible. I’m absolutely certain of it. 
I’m quite sure that August Frohlich, who 
was a mayor, was incorruptible. I think Mr. 
[John A.) Cooper, who was a mayor, was 
incorruptible. And so was—oh, the guy 
before him. I don’t think there was—that I 
know of my own knowledge—of any great 
deal of corruption. Oh, some of it went on, 
unquestionably, but I don’t know about it. 

[What sort of attitudes of my own did I 
bring to these planning and zoning boards? 
What is my philosophy of what city planning 



Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoniing and Planning 


63 


involves, of what zoning should be?] Well, city 
planning and zoning is a question of selecting 
those portions of the town suitable for certain 
businesses, certain activities, keeping in mind 
access to the city, egress from the city, and 
the volume of this kind of business that has 
to be handled, and the fact that you have— 
you will undoubtedly have overlappings in 
between any lines you may set up, as, here 
you may have manufacturing; here you may 
have ordinary business; here you must have 
residential; here you must have estates of an 
acre, no less. In Reno, for instance, when I was 
thinking of zoning the land east of the hospital 
for industry, we had two transcontinental 
highways, SO and 40, coming through Reno. 
We had two transcontinental railroads in 
Reno, SP and the Western. We had airlines; 
we had trucking facilities, and a new road, 
Kietzke, was at that time being thought 
about, and they were also talking about 
running Plumb Lane clear through and to join 
[Highway] 40 at Vista. And we had a freeport 
discussion coming up (this was several years 
before it finally went into effect). So it did 
seem that there should be a division of the 
areas of the city, such that those areas that 
were convenient to transportation, to water 
such as we can get in the wells out there, to 
sewage disposal which was right handy to that 
area could go into heavy industry, and that the 
areas that were going up to the southwest, up 
the hill toward the mountains, were ideal for 
residential areas. 

And I thought at that time that this is 
the way the city would 90, mostly, and that 
business would go out South Virginia. Because 
I figured that with the industrial development 
to the north—Timber Road and that place, the 
University, the Catholic cemeteries, and so 
forth, that there was a whole line that would 
block off any important development in those 
areas and to that direction. This has been fairly 


true. The development that’s gone out there 
has been because land was very cheap and 
they built cheap houses. This has not been 
an outstanding residential development that 
went out in that direction. Now, it could have 
gone up the river, too. But I thought that the 
better residential section would go to the 
southwest, and that business would have to go 
out South Virginia. These things are gradually, 
it seems, coming about. 

I did not at that time have any conception 
of the number of people that might be 
here and the congestion that is resulting, 
for instance. You take the Riverside Hotel, 
Holiday Hotel, the Post Office, and we had 
the State Building (now the Pioneer Theater 
Auditorium), and the Mapes Hotel, and the 
Masonic Temple building, and the river. 
There they all are. A great gob of people can 
be brought together. And there is no way for 
them to get out except to sit in their cars, 
bumper to bumper, and take their time. And I 
thought that something should be done about 
that. So we recommended (when I was on the 
planning board) that they set aside an area 
from, say, Center Street on Mill east for four or 
five blocks, and then go south for four or five 
blocks, and set that aside for a development 
for the city—libraries and auditoriums and 
parking, and so forth. This caught on for a 
while. But the difficulty of buying these people 
out, getting the land, closing off the streets 
(there would have to be a couple of pretty wide 
through streets through the area if you closed 
off that much land)—. And it fell through, 
so that we now have a Pioneer Theater down 
here where you can’t even park a car, and a 
Coliseum out four or five miles away, instead 
of having these things nearby. 

Another thing was the concessions that 
could be set up. (And my experience with 
concessions, I’ll tell you about that in a 
minute.) The concessions that could be set 



64 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


up where you had these things concentrated, 
and a great number of people who could use 
them in one place and still have parking, could 
get in and get out, the concessions would be 
extremely valuable. 

Now, when I was building inspector 
and we were pushing the idea of a civic 
auditorium—. Later on, we tried to design 
one in the high school, but it wasn’t big 
enough. We were pushing the idea of a civic 
auditorium. And I took a trip and visited 
auditoriums in Fresno, in Oakland, San Jose, 
in Portland, in Vancouver, in Edmonton 
(Canada), and I got their yearly uses and 
found, for instance, that in Fresno, they only 
allowed the use of a very beautiful auditorium 
for fiestas and a very limited number of 
events because they didn’t want to interfere 
with the use of downtown facilities. In San 
Jose, I found an auditorium that had put on 
1,050 events in the year proceeding when I 
went there. With a crew of only seven men, 
they could set up for a convention meeting in 
the morning, for a women’s big affair in the 
afternoon, for a fight or a wrestling match at 
night, and go right back and do lit all over 
again next morning. And that auditorium 
was paying off its principal, its interest, all of 
its expenses, and showing a little profit. The 
Oakland auditorium was doing the same 
thing and showing a— well, it was paying its 
way; there was no particular profit. 

So we worked out the details of an 
auditorium in Reno, not a plan of a building, 
but a plan of operation, such that, as I recollect 
it, we figured there would be four people to a 
car. So for whatever the population is going 
to be, we would want parking spaces for that 
many cars, and then we would add twenty- 
five percent of that space to take care of buses 
and commercial vehicles, and that sort of 
thing. [We estimated] that there would be 
one garment checked for each six persons, 


and we wanted checking facilities spread 
around so that people had a chance to walk 
up without getting in lines, long lines, and get 
to their coats, and so forth, their wraps. We 
wanted to be able to sell all sorts of dogs and 
popcorn and drinks, and that sort of thing, 
so that there would be available to you one of 
these counters where you could get them, and 
one person would be there. The kitchen for 
these things would be in one place, and they 
would be handled from the basement, and 
there would be dumbwaiters to these small 
things so that the supplies kept coming up 
hot from the kitchen. We were told that the 
profit in running any one of these things came 
from the concessions, not from the tickets 
that you could sell. You couldn’t make it go 
on the tickets. This was proven in Portland, 
it was proven in Vancouver, it was proven in 
Edmonton that they were not making money, 
and that they did not have adequate facilities 
for parking, or putting away garments, for 
selling popcorn [laughing], and that sort of 
thing. That’s where the money is, and the 
theaters have proven that with their sales. You 
can’t get to the counter. They’re selling stuff 
all over the place. Movies are really making 
it, more from their concessions than they are 
otherwise. 

So we worked this all out, and we worked 
out the territory that we would need, we tried 
to set aside that territory for a beginning with 
an auditorium, and that was it. It just flopped. 
Nobody was interested. They didn’t care 
[laughing] whether we’d made the trip or not. 

These sidelines have been my meat, 
the Uniform Building Code. I’ve loved that 
work. And I’m still in it! I get every now 
and then a letter saying that we have this 
problem that has come up, and it does not 
affect the meat of the Uniform Building 
Code, but it affects the enforcement of code 
provisions by, particularly, the smaller cities 



Building Inspection, Uniform Building Code, Zoniing and Planning 


65 


that don’t have a lot of technical men who 
can defend themselves against the attacks of 
a big contracting firm. You know, when some 
contractor builds work all over the world and 
knows the codes of the states, the nations, and 
what have you, and they come in and they 
want to do something that saves them quite 
a lot of money but it’s contrary to your code, 
all of a sudden, you have to know what you’re 
talking about or they beat you down, and they 
do it. Some other one of the smaller operators 
in your area comes around and wants to do 
it and you say no, and he don’t know how to 
argue with you. So you win that one, and you 
lose the other one—same thing. 




9 


Some of My Important 
Architectural Jobs 


[What were some of the architectural jobs 
through those years that I was the building 
inspector?] Oh, [there] was remodeling of the 
Elks Club—. [Laughing) Boy, I’ve forgotten! 
Elks Club. Oh, I did some residences, and 
I’ve forgotten who they were for. One was for 
the funeral director, Ted Grosbeck. So I did 
some houses, and I did small jobs, $40-, $50-, 
$60,000, which I could do at home. 

I was thinking I remodeled all of the Carson 
buildings during Balzar’s administration, 
including the governor’s mansion and the 
orphans’ home, the armory, the capitol 
building. And I did a complete remodel 
of one of the—I don’t know what they 
called it. I think it was the supreme court 
building, to make it available for the highway 
department. I’d forgotten about those. The 
governor’s mansion when Balzar was there 
was quite interesting. He made quite a bit of 
his expenses through a poker game. And I 
think that the people who were invited to the 
poker game were invited to lose [laughing]. 
He had a cellar beneath the stairway to the 
second floor—big barrel of beer in the end, I 


remember, and it was just stocked with booze 
of all kinds, and this was in Prohibition times, 
when booze wasn’t bought. He was the sheriff 
of Mineral County before he became elected. 
He was quite a character. 

And then there was [George] Greathouse, 
who was his secretary of state. He was the 
former recorder, I think, in Elko County. I 
knew him up there, and I knew him. I was 
trying to think of the name of the attorney 
general at that time. [Gray] Mashburn’s the 
guy I’m trying to think of. When I was doing 
work down there and I wanted to get hold of 
the capitol commissioners, and I tried to get 
hold of Mashburn, he was always busy and 
in conference, and one thing and another. 
So I’d go out in the hall about twenty feet 
from the door to his office, call him up on 
the telephone, and he’d say, “Well, haul your 
fanny in here!” He had his feet on the desk, 
smokin’ a cigar [laughing]! But his girl always 
had him “busy.” 

I remembered one of the early jobs that 
Father did, which was tied in with St. Mary’s 
Hospital, for whom I worked for nearly forty 



68 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


years. It was a school in Benicia, California, 
for the Dominican sisters, t that time, an 
architect could go into the state of California 
without asking permission from anyone. This 
will be interesting later on, when we talk about 
changes in the profession. He did the school 
there, and later on, I did a new operating 
room in the convent across the street from 
St. Mary’s Hospital, on the third floor, yet. 
And they had no elevator. And they used 
that as a hospital and operating room there. 
Then, sometime later, an architect from San 
Francisco named [Willis] Polk [and Barrett 
and Hilp, contractors] did their first unit of 
the present hospital. And thereafter, t did all 
of the work on St. Mary’s Hospital to date. 
And it was all done with Sister Seraphine as 
the administrator. I, as a Mason, Protestant, 
worked with Sister Seraphine beautifully over 
all those years. 

We did St. Mary’s in several units. There 
was an east wing (and I don’t have the dates 
for these things in my mind at present); there 
was a west wing; there was an addition of 
two floors to the west wing; then there was a 
rather massive addition which covered nearly 
all of the block, and which can still take two 
additional stories. St. Mary’s has over three 
hundred beds now, and could go to close to 
five hundred beds. That was one of the early 
jobs, and I had many continuing jobs. 

Another contact that I made was with the 
bank, First National Bank, at the time when 
Mr. [Ed] Questa was the president. And I 
had known Mr. Questa from school days, 
practically. And I was associated with the First 
National Bank, then, for a good many years, 
doing banks throughout the state. I did banks 
in Las Vegas, several of them. I did a bank in 
Tonopah, in Yerington, in Carson, several 
banks in Reno, and at Elko. I lost the bank 
business because when Mr. [Bert] Fitz called 
us and asked us to do two banks and I was out 


of town, Mr. Erskine simply told him, “He’s 
too busy.” And Mr. Fitz got another architect, 
and that other architect did all of their banks 
for ten years as a result of that. I could be a 
millionaire. Well, that’s the bank business. 

[What are the special problems involved 
in designing and supervising the construction 
of banks?] Well, a bank, naturally, is a business 
with all of its own peculiarities. It has to serve 
the public with the public inside its building. 
It has to provide access for the public to make 
deposits at night, and that sort of thing. It 
needs to have a plan where officers and tellers 
may contact one another without going across 
“public” space, which means that the ideal 
setup would be a “U” design for the tellers, the 
officers, and all of the workers. So the public 
would come into the mouth of the “U,. and 
there was contact in private areas for all of 
the rest of the employees. The bank naturally 
must have its safety deposit boxes, and they 
must be accessible to the public, and safely so. 

Then, of course, it has its vault with the 
vault doors. They are a problem in themselves. 
Usually, the manufacturer of the vault door 
comes with his door and approves the 
construction that has been left to receive it, 
and installs it himself. Frequently, in banks, 
it’s necessary to reinforce the floor in order 
to take the vault door across the floor to its 
opening, where it’s to fit. 

The officers, also, besides being able to 
communicate with all the parts of the bank 
in private space, must also be accessible to the 
public. There is a great deal of checking that 
has to be done, and there must be facilities 
for that. Sometimes these banks have TV, 
in which they can have a teller’s window—a 
drive-in window, we’ll say—outside the bank. 
Any documents that have to be checked by 
that teller, she has a public address system 
(or he), and he says that he has Mr. So-and- 
Po here for a check cashing, and he wants 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


69 


to know whether or not the account is up to 
date, [whether] there’s enough money in it, 
that the check is good if it’s a foreign check. 
And if any papers must be shown, the teller 
can put papers down on a glass plate, and a 
TV screen shows it to the people in the bank. 
Otherwise, it would be difficult to handle, 
such as the South Virginia bank, where we 
have two outdoor tellers. Also, there is a 
problem of safety, of burglar alarms, the 
possibility of camera surveillance, and that 
sort of thing. 

And with all that, the bank must be in 
keeping with its background, or whatever I’m 
trying to say now. It’s not background, but in 
keeping with what people think of a bank, as 
class. The surroundings must be very nice— 
not luxurious, but nice. 

In the small banks, the only real rooms 
that are necessary are an accounting room and 
a conference room and a couple of offices. In 
the big banks, they have whole floors that are 
taken over by people with trust departments. 
That trust department is another section of 
the bank that perhaps small banks don’t have. 
But in Reno, for instance, where so many 
people have in the past come on account of 
a tax situation and created trusts, they have 
a tremendous trust department. So much for 
the banks. 

Then there was the National Guard. We 
have done National Guard armories in several 
cities—Las Vegas, in Lovelock, in Reno, 
in Carson. We did in Carson not only an 
armory and machine shop, but offices for the 
National Guard. And there was one incident, 
I remember, in connection with the National 
Guard that points up some of the difficulty 
of dealing with governmental agencies. I 
went back to Washington for a conference in 
the Pentagon with a head of National Guard 
construction in the United States. Me was a 
colonel. 


By the way, I went back in one of these 
National Guard trainers, a two-seater. And 
I had a flying suit which was a little short 
from the crotch to the shoulders, and I had 
a helmet which was a little small, with the 
result that I was really all jammed up by the 
time I got back to Bolling Field in the East. 
And my glasses, the temple—well, there was 
a line in my head on each side where this 
had been pressed in [laughing]. And the 
radio simply goes continuously. It’d drive me 
crazy) And it’s just narrow enough so that 
I could keep my elbows almost in front of 
me, a very narrow little place to sit. And you 
have a parachute on. You’re sitting, of course, 
on the parachute, with all the harnesses 
on. And they say to you quite calmly, “If 
anything happens, I’ll press the button and 
it’ll eject you. And then you count ten and 
you pull this little string, and you’ll be okay” 
[laughing]. 

Well, I got back to the Pentagon. And this 
gentleman (I do not remember his name), 
a colonel, I had talked to him on other 
occasions, very pleasantly, and I couldn’t get 
to see him. I stayed in his office there for, I 
guess, an hour. The girl always said, swell, he 
hasn’t come in yet,” or, “He did come in, all 
right, but he’s busy, and what have you. Finally, 
her telephone rang. The talked—I’m sure she 
was talking to the colonel. And she said, “Will 
you see his civilian counterpart, please? So 
across the hall I go, and here’s a fellow who 
is just up in arms with importance about his 
job. And this guy that’s come in from this 
little town of Reno and trying to talk about 
National Guard construction. And he was 
very difficult. 

So when I got through with him, I still had 
some things that had to be changed, that’s all 
there was to it. I went back into the office and 
I told the girl, I said, “Look. Now, I’ve done 
my business with this gentleman across the 



70 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


hall, and I want to talk to the colonel, just as 
a friend. I know him quite well.” 

“Well, she said, “I’ll see if he’s in.” 

And he said, “Come on in.” 

And I found out why he wouldn’t talk 
to me about this job. His tour of duty at the 
Pentagon was terminated in two weeks. He 
had put in for a station, and he thought it 
was very favorable then that he would get this 
assignment to the station where he wanted to 
go. And he was not about to get into any kind 
of a controversy about building with anybody, 
that for the next two weeks, he was simply 
alone, unavailable, until that came through. 
This’ll give you an idea of one of the little 
things that happens. 

Mother job that I did was for the Navy 
at Fallon. And this was an antenna field, a 
directional radio installation for bringing the 
planes into the field. And it was very fussy. 
The two buildings I was building had to be 
precisely one mile apart—5,280 feet, period. 
And other things. The antenna field, which 
means a lot of poles stuck around with wires 
between (that’s what they call an antenna 
field), that had to be exactly as designed by 
the experts—poles just so far apart, and all 
that sort of thing. And they sent up a young 
lieutenant as an inspector from the General 
Services Administration. And I finally had to 
go down to California and see the head man 
to even get this job off the ground. This kid, he 
was very eager and he didn’t know too much. 
So I got some help and got the job started, 
but this kid continued to give reports about 
the “stupid architect,” with the result that I 
finally got a letter from the general. Where is 
this—there’s a little town right cut across from 
the airport down there. That’s where their 
headquarters is. I can’t think of the name of 
it. The general wrote me a very rough letter 
about my failure to cooperate, and this, that, 
and the other thing, and that perhaps it would 


be better if I didn’t apply for any more jobs 
from his department. 

So, on another trip down there, I went 
in to see the general. I got in to see him. He 
was extremely pleasant at first. And I said, “I 
want an explanation for this letter, that I will 
never do another job for your department.” I 
said, “Here is a young man out here who has 
given you, evidently, many reports about me, 
and I have never been asked to explain any 
of them at all. I just get a letter from you that 
I’m through with your department. And,” I 
said, “now, I want to see if I can’t get you to 
sit down in your office for a short time, check 
into these things and find out what the score 
is, rather than going out and playing golf every 
afternoon and going to cocktail parties every 
night,” which he did. And when I said that, 
I happened to be a little red in the face, and, 
of course, it terminated the interview very 
quickly [laughing]. But these are the sort of 
things, and particularly with the service. 

some contracts are beautiful, and some 
contracts, such as at Stead Air Force Base, 
where we did 645 living units for the Air 
Force, we had a contractor from Los Angeles 
who was on the make. He wanted to change 
everything to cheaper materials, and he was 
just trying to make money right and left. He 
had a very low bid. His bid was eight million 
dollars, and I think the next bid was nearly 
ten million dollars. So obviously, this man 
had to get some money someplace. And the 
result of that was I was continually turning 
down things that he did, and demanding that 
things be done over. I had to make daily trips 
out there, which an architect don’t normally 
do. Sun’s so hot. I can’t even 

The next thing I know, I got a letter 
from—I believe it was Texas, a general there, 
asking me to come to Texas for a hearing. And 
I sort of said, “The heck with that. If you want 
a hearing, come on out here and have one!” 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


71 


So they did. They brought twelve or 
fifteen supposed experts out to go through 
this job with a fine tooth comb. And they 
took eight-by-ten pictures, and on the back of 
each picture they typed quite an explanation 
of this item that was defective. One of the 
things was the floors that were cracking up. 
[Laughing] And I had notified their authority 
on the job. I couldn’t tell the contractor he had 
to do anything. I had to give the information 
to their authority on the job, and he told the 
contractor. But he didn’t tell him. 

Well, the result was that they came out 
and they thought they had me tied to the 
cross. And they did schedule a hearing, 
and there were two generals to head the 
hearing. And they had a young major as 
their attorney, He was a Jewish boy. And we 
started going through this thing, and every 
time they got one of the pictures, I had a 
letter—perhaps two or three letters—to this 
officer at Stead Air Force Ease, who was in 
charge of the construction for the Air Force, 
delineating what was being done and making 
a recommendation of what should be done. 
And that’s all my job requires rue to do as an 
architect. I can’t tell a contractor anything 
because I have no contract with him. 

Well, very shortly, the general got a little 
bit tired of this because they weren’t looking 
too good. And this little— [laughing] this little 
major was getting nastier and nastier, and I 
said to him, I said, “Major, are you a graduate 
of West Point?” 

He says, “Yes, I am.” “Well,” I said, “that’s 
funny.” I said, “I had always heard that West 
Point turned out officers and gentlemen. But 
you only got half of it.” Boom!! The general 
stood up and said, “Now, this will do!” 
[laughing] And he looked around for a minute 
and he said, “Well,” he said, “I think the best 
thing to do is to start fresh. 2e will dismiss all 
of this material, and we will start fresh. And 


we will provide twelve inspectors to work 
under Mr. Ferris,” because I couldn’t afford to 
hire the number of inspectors they needed. I 
only had four inspectors. And they’d provide 
the twelve and pay their expenses here, and 
their salaries and everything, “to work with 
Mr. Ferris.” 

And do you know, in a week, you couldn’t 
find a document on that base about what had 
gone on before? They were out, destroyed. 
You’d have to go to Chicago or back to Texas to 
find a single document of what had transpired 
before this took place. 

So it points up the fact that to do work 
with organizations in which there’s a chain of 
command, with one man protecting his job 
so the next man can protect his job, and this 
man to his job, that it requires experience, 
a knowledge of what can take place—what 
probably is taking place—on the part of a 
contractor with the government in order to 
keep things running smoothly. It requires, 
sometimes, a little compromise with your 
own conscience. And these compromises 
come about by reason of the fact that [there’re] 
certain things you can not do. You can’t win. 
And the best thing for your job, and the best 
thing for your client, is to get as close to the 
right thing as you can, or else get fired, one of 
the two, and who wants to get fired? 

Well, that takes care of the government. 
Now, we had been doing a little Catholic 
work for the Catholic church besides St. 
Mary’s. I remember one of the jobs. They 
thought the tower on the church at Virginia 
City was leaning badly and might collapse. 
They wanted to find out how safe it really 
was. I got trapped in that tower. I could 
go up through this hole in the floor, but 
when I started to get down to the ladder, I 
couldn’t cock my legs to get down through 
the ladder— through the hole. Took quite a 
while to get me out of there. 



72 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Another thing that I did, I got out on 
the ridge of this church [laughing] and 
inched my— The ridge was about like this 
(gesturing], very sharp. I inched myself away 
so I could get a look at the tower and plumb 
it. And when I got out there and I started to 
come back, I happened to look down. And I 
was up about four or five stories in the air! 
I tell you, I had my fingerprints in those 
shingles coming back down [laughing]. 

Well, let’s see. I guess the next thing would 
be schools. Now, my father—I have told you 
of the schools he did, Reno High School and 
Mt. Rose, and—four or five of them. We did 
schools in Lovelock; that was a high school. 
?. Where’d we do schools, for heaven’s sake? In 
Minden, in Carson. 

I had a very interesting job in Carson. The 
school burned. It was burned out. It was a— 
the building is still standing there, although 
it’s now abandoned. I was going to repair it, 
build back the floors, and so forth. And there 
was a mass meeting headed by a carpenter 
who said that this should be torn down, it 
was unsafe, and that I should be eliminated 
from the picture. 

Well, I got by with this, and I built the 
school. And shortly after I built it, a terrific 
snowstorm came along with a wind, and it 
drifted snow on the level from the peak of the 
roof right out to the eaves on the other side. 
You couldn’t’ve got that much load on it again 
in a long time. The school never budged. So 
they used it from then on for, I guess, twenty 
years until they finally abandoned it. 

I did the Fourth Street junior high school, 
which has now been torn down. I did B. 
D. Billinghurst Junior High School, which 
is still in use, and which there was a great 
controversy at one time about the number 
of exits because they had a fire, and I had to 
repair the building again, put it back in shape. 
And at that time, quite a discussion arose 


about the number of exits in this school. It 
developed that there were about eleven exits, 
eleven ways to go, which is far too many in 
any two-story building of its size. But in order 
to satisfy the PTA and others interested, a 
steel set of stairs was put outside from one of 
the rooms as [laughing] — as another exit. It 
couldn’t be very effective. But this is the way 
things go when the public gets into the act. 
They can really raise Cain. 

Then there was the E. Otis Vaughn Junior 
High School. And about that time, also, there 
was the Reno High School. This Reno High 
School is the first big high school in the city. 
And in order to secure duplicate use of the 
rooms so that a room could be used every 
period of the day by a class, we put small 
offices with the rooms, such that a teacher 
who used the room most of the time would 
have a place to work, to confer with the 
members of the class while some other teacher 
used her room. In order to do this, we had a 
schedule of classes made out for a period of 
ten years, supposedly. This was looking ahead 
for a period of ten years to bring the school 
up to 2,000 people, which was its ultimate 
capacity. And that capacity was possible only 
because we had these small offices. So before 
we designed the building, we had a chair in 
a room for every single student in the high 
school at 2,000. 

And then we went to work to design the 
school. We used in that school, for the first time 
in Reno, radiant heat in the first floor, which 
has been very successful. We used a heating 
system which has been the most economical 
in the school system of this area ever since 
it was built, in which we simply took a very 
large steam pipeline (I think it was a ten- or 
twelve-inch line) down a corridor underneath 
the main corridor on the first floor (this is 
underground). And wherever there were four 
or five or six rooms that had the same exposure 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


73 


to the weather and to the winds, we would put 
a thermostat in one of those rooms. We would 
then take steam from this pipe and run it into 
a heat exchanger which made hot water. And 
there were pumps on the hot water and they 
pumped it through the pipes into the radiators 
and into the first floor. It was through the 
pipes under the floor, the radiant heat. And 
so we had, in effect, one central heat supply 
and many small heating systems, all of them 
available for repair by a man standing up with 
an electric light near him. Because with this 
corridor—a man could stand up in a corridor, 
and everything was there except the pipes that 
carried the hot water. 

[Laughing] Funny thing happened there. 
Savage had to do a little plumbing job and 
drilled a hole through the floor. And his man 
just drilled a hole right straight through those 
wrought iron pipes down in the tube, went 
through the whole thing. And they covered 
it up. savage knew about it, but he didn’t want 
to fix it. He says, “Oh, well, this is only one 
room anyhow. It’ll keep warm. The rest of’em 
on each side, they’ll keep it warm.” [laughing) 
So we had to find out what was happening and 
dig down and repair the whole thing, and Mr. 
Savage paid the bill for that, of course. 

During that job, we had a rather high 
wind come along. 4e had finished the roof 
over the gymnasium. The gymnasium was 
112 by 160 feet in area. And in the roof of the 
gymnasium, we had two twelve-foot square 
openings that were open to the air. They had 
a series of pans underneath that would stop 
all water, moisture, and so forth, from getting 
through, but it also allowed venting to the 
atmosphere from this room. 

Well, a wind which later turned out to 
be only seventy miles an hour came up from 
the southwest, blew across the top of the 
gymnasium parapet (this parapet was only 
about three feet higher than the surrounding 


roof), creating a bit of a vacuum on the lee 
side. We had, in place, a tar and gravel roof, 
which weighs about seven pounds to the 
square foot and is shower nailed into the roof 
materials. And the roofing materials were 
three-inch thick plank. This wind, or this 
vacuum, tore up a section of that roof about 
twenty feet wide and nearly 160 feet long 
(there was some protection on one side), tore 
it loose and threw it back over the parapet, 
and left it hanging down on the outside of 
the wall. This seems impossible, because the 
roof—without any nailing to a subbase, the 
roof is so stiff that you can’t take your two 
hands and bend it much. It’s a heavy roof. 

Well, in explanation of that, we asked the 
University to give that material to someone 
and find out why this happened. He said, 
“Well, it’s simple.” He said, “Your air pressure 
here at this altitude’s about twelve and a half 
pounds to the square inch. And,” he said, “if 
you lost only one pound by the creation of 
that vacuum, that in one square of roof, you 
would have a pushout from the inside to the 
outside, where the pressure was less, the air 
pressure, of 15,000 pounds. And a square is 
ten feet by ten feet, a hundred square feet. 
There would be 15,000 pounds pushing out on 
every square of roof. Your two twelve feet by 
twelve feet vents, under all normal conditions, 
are sufficient to vent a difference in pressure. 
They could let some of the air out and drop 
the pressure in the gym so there wouldn’t be 
a tendency for the inside pressure of the air to 
push anything out.” But this happened so fast 
they wouldn’t function. And it just pushed it 
right out and over the parapet. And I’ve never 
seen it since, although people do tell about 
how their roofs are popped off their houses in 
high winds. This was a very odd experience. 

We had quite a cafeteria in connection 
with that school, a large one, although there’s 
nothing in connection with that. 



74 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


We had a portable stage, we had a portable 
stage in sections that could be rolled in and 
set up so that you had a raised platform. And 
we had down the wall (and it’s still there; you 
can see it) the cables for the tormentors and 
for the overhead scenery, and one thing and 
another, all counterbalanced, ready to go, 
so that you could hang almost any kind of 
a scenery set that you wanted and control it 
from these cables over on the wall. We had 
a rolling electrical setup which took care 
of all the stage lighting, which is also hung 
from these cables, and is separate from the 
lighting of the gymnasium itself. !t also had 
dimmers. This thing was about ten feet long 
and seven feet high. It was a big switchbox, 
believe me, and very heavy. You could dim 
half of the lights in the gymnasium so that 
for, oh, musicals (if they were going to give 
them that sort of thing), there’d be sufficient 
light to look at a program, probably, and it 
was otherwise dim. Or you could cut them 
down to almost nothing. You had theatrical 
control. But it never worked out. It was too 
much trouble to set it up and get someone that 
could handle all of these different parts of it, 
although I know the Shrine, for years, used 
the gymnasium for their big ceremonials. It 
has never been very successful. 

However, there are a couple of items in 
connection with that school. One was a survey 
I made of the probable school population 
of the city in a ten-year period. And I got 
information from the Post Office; I got 
information from the Census and particularly 
from the chain stores, and a bank, as to what 
they thought, or what was projected—and 
also, the telephone company, but they didn’t 
have too much at that time. However, I came 
up with the idea that in ten years, Reno would 
be 75,000 people; that was in 1957. And I 
think that’s about what it was in 1957. And 
the telephone company, at about that time 


(1957), in making a survey of their own, asked 
me for a copy of this survey so they could 
see how it was arrived at. Well, it was arrived 
at—. The city also had records, and the sewer 
connection records, and that sort of thing. 
They were all valuable. 

There was then the recommendation 
that they get a bridge put across the Truckee 
on—well, where it is now, Keystone, and go 
straight across to California [Avenue] —or not 
necessarily straight, but across to California, 
and then cut through that bank into Sharon 
Way, which would give them, at the high 
school, California Street for an east-west 
through street, and Keystone and Sharon 
Way for a north-south through street. Of 
course, they didn’t do it. But today, they have 
a bridge across at Keystone. But they did not 
go through and connect with Sharon, which 
was a logical thing to do. They wouldn’t 
have any more trouble at the intersection 
than they have now. That was a second item. 
[This was one of the first buildings that they 
tried to bring the teachers in on designing?] 
Yes, oh, we brought the teachers in in gobs. 
And strangely enough, they were at swords’ 
points when we started. Teachers had different 
overall ideas as to what should happen and 
how it should be done. And it wasn’t very long, 
after a short series of meetings, really, ’till these 
teachers were all coming into line. They were 
agreeing on certain fundamental things that 
they thought would be excellent. You would 
think, when we started, that they would never 
get together. But they did beautifully. And, of 
course, the idea of projecting classes for ten 
years had never been done in this area. And 
I think it was very successful in conjunction 
with that school. 

Oh, here’s something else that happened. 
The school is a reinforced concrete school. 
And in order to protect it in the case of a 
serious earthquake, it’s built in three sections. 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


75 


There’s a central section, which is about four 
hundred feet long, and then at right angles 
a northern section, which is another three 
hundred feet long. And then there is the 
southern section containing the gymnasium 
and that sort of thing. (I want to tell you about 
the band room, too.) These separations are 
two-inch separations. And today, if you go into 
that school and look at one of those—they’re 
covered over with copper that is flexible, bends 
back and forth. And these things move, believe 
me! If you look at this two-inch separation as 
marked by the copper cover on the first floor, 
where the heat is radiant heat, there is almost 
no difference (between] winter and summer. 
And it is two Inches wide. But if you go up 
to the second floor and look at the ceiling in 
the summertime, you will find that it’s only 
about three quarters of an inch. So these big 
concrete buildings have really moved. This is 
the summertime, and the heat, it expands the 
concrete. 

However, our thought in covering this 
building was this: we could build a building of 
reinforced concrete. We could set up standard 
forms, unit forms, and we could use them 
over and over, as long as they would stand 
up. As long as they’d hold together, we could 
just keep using those forms. And we made 
those forms for three bays of the building at 
a time. And, of course, they left a very patchy 
and a very rough surface of concrete. We did 
not spend the money on finish forms and on 
the finishing work for concrete, and on the 
painting and continuous painting of concrete 
surfaces that would have to be done through 
the years. We came back, then, and we covered 
the entire exterior with one layer of brick, four 
inch layer of brick, which we knew would 
never have to be touched, unless they have to 
go and point the joints sometime, when some 
of the mortar has softened. Nothing has ever 
been done with that exterior to date. 


Well, there were a couple of ladies here 
who had been very vocal in opposing the 
location of the school in that area, which they 
called a swamp. And they, in hearing of this 
extra lining of brick throughout a building 
that was already built, raised quite a bit of 
commotion, and finally went to the members 
of the legislature. And they told them that we 
had spent $500,000 unnecessarily in covering 
the building with brick. 

So it was necessary that I work out, then, 
the projected savings as against the cost of the 
brick. The cost of the brick was only $34,000. 
The projected savings had to do with savings 
in form work, and savings in finishing, savings 
in painting the exterior of the building, and 
very particularly, with savings in heating and 
cooling. And we did have a little cool air, not 
air conditioning by any manner of means. 
The savings are very real. Because that extra 
four inches of brick plus the mortar that went 
behind it, making the wall instead of eight 
inches nearly thirteen inches thick, made 
a building that was much, much easier to 
heat, took lots less fuel and a much smaller 
(heating) plant—about twenty percent, as a 
matter of fact, smaller plant. 

Well, this is comme ci comme ca. Maybe 
it’s true, maybe it’s not. Maybe it’s too much, 
maybe it’s too little [laughing]. But this I had 
to do. And that killed that particular fuss. 

Oh, there was a big fuss over the tile in 
the hallways. Now, our theory on putting tile 
in the hallways was that here is wainscot that 
will be as good in ten years as it is today. It 
cannot be scarred; it can’t be written On; it can 
be cleaned with a wet rag. And we figured that 
there wasn’t too much of it because there’re 
a tremendous number of lockers in the same 
area where the tile is. It has proven out in the 
long run, that, as of today (and this is eighteen 
years since that school was built), that tile is 
just as good today as it was when it was put up. 



76 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


And there has been no problem in painting it 
or cleaning it. So that also stood up. 

I’ll tell you a real funny one. We had a 
ten-inch water line coming into the building. 
And we had to have at each end of the 
building a connection for the fire department 
at that water line. That water line was a cast 
iron coming up to the building while it was 
underground, but there was no need to spend 
that kind of money for protected steel inside 
the building, so we were using galvanized 
iron, which meant that we had to connect the 
galvanized iron to the cast iron. And this was 
done in the normal way. The galvanized iron 
ran into a bell, and there was some caulking 
and so forth put in. It was perfectly tight for 
the pressures that were expected, which was 
sixty-five pounds to the square inch. 

One day, I was standing very close to this 
connection in the south end of the building, 
and we were testing the line to make sure that 
it was watertight every place. And there was 
a gauge on this pipe that I could read all the 
time, and it stood at about sixty-five pounds. 
I was talking with someone. I turned around 
to glance at the gauge, and it said a hundred 
and seventy pounds. And I looked at it again, 
and I said, “Did you see this?” 

And we looked back, and it was almost 
back to sixty-five again. And this plumber 
said, “My God! That was a hell of a surge.” 

Well, there are increases due to surge, and 
we didn’t have any standpipes in the line—the 
power company didn’t have any standpipes in 
the line. So if there should happen to come 
one of those surges, the pressure would 
increase. What this meant to me was that if 
that surge came on and hit that joint between 
the galvanized iron pipe and the cast iron 
pipe and broke it loose, I’d have a ten-inch 
water line running into that basement with 
about $300,000 worth of damage done in ten 
minutes. You never saw anybody get action 


so fast! I had collars made and welded to this 
cast iron pipe, and collars made and welded 
to the galvanized iron—in fact, with bolts 
between them [laughing]. We bolted both of 
those connections. Brother! 

Another thing we did in connection with 
that building due to the commotion about 
its being in a swamp (and actually, Smith- 
Peterson had a sand and gravel pit out there. 
That’s how much of a swamp it was), we put 
down a well for a year before the building was 
started to see where the water level was. And 
the highest the water level ever got was sixteen 
feet below the ground. And our building is 
only ten feet below the ground at the lowest 
point. So we had no trouble there. 

They had a creek running through the site, 
and we had to build a culvert, and this was 
a reinforced concrete culvert about ten feet 
wide and about four feet high underground. 
It took the creek down and bypassed all of the 
site and then went to the river. And we had 
to protect both ends of that against rubbish 
and kids with iron grilles, steel grilles. And 
I tell you, for a time there, the rubbish that 
gathered on those steel grilles almost made 
the little creek overflow and back up into 
that housing development [laughing] there. 
But we got there with the whole thing. And I 
believe that this has been a very satisfactory 
school as of the time that it was built, and for 
quite a period after it was built. 

Well, there was some uproar in the 
community [regarding the Reno High 
School] A The architects have no approval of 
subcontractors. They have the right and the 
necessity to recommend to the owner of a 
project that he take certain steps, whatever 
they may be. They have the right to say to the 


*See Reno Evening Gazette, September 
14, 1949 




Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


77 


owner, “Of the subcontractors offered by this 
general contractor, we feel that these two men 
are controversial. They’re not up to snuff, and 
we would prefer other subcontractors more 
acceptable to us (and should be to the owner) 
be submitted.” 

It develops, however, that in general, if 
you change a subcontractor on a building, 
and his bid is, we’ll say, $10,000 higher than 
the subcontractor’s bid which has been 
accepted—. Now, these subcontractors do not 
bid to the owner, you know. They bid to the 
contractor, who is going to bid to the owner. 
If you switch—if this man makes you a bid 
and he has made it, accepting this bid, which 
was $10,000 low and you say, “I don’t want 
that man. Take the next man,” and it’s $10,000 
higher, he says, “Okay. Give me $10,000 and 
I’ll take him. But I’m not going to put up 
$10,000 that I didn’t figure because you don’t 
like my man.” So immediately, here comes a 
man [who] says he’s good. I say he’s not good. 
Who’s right? 

Well, sometimes you find out in a court of 
lawwho’s right, for maybe $10,- $15,- $20,000 
of your money [laughing]. I don’t recollect in 
Reno High School what I may have said about 
subcontractors. 

There was one thing that happened in the 
Reno High School. We put down a concrete 
floor and finished it. And the temperature 
dropped from about a seventy to far below 
freezing, like twenty [degrees], in three or four 
hours in the afternoon. And it froze the floor, 
hut it didn’t freeze clear through the floor; it 
froze the surface. And the question became, 
“Now, is this floor strong enough? Can we 
take off the frozen stuff,” which does not set 
up like concrete. It sets up like ice, and you 
can chip it off when it gets warm. 

So when you’ve got a floor that’s that thick 
and you freeze that much of the top material 
that does not act as part of the floor, if a 


floor is six inches thick and you lose an inch, 
you’ve lost one sixth of the floor—you’ve lost 
one sixth of the floor depth. The difference 
between twenty-five, thirty, and thirty-six— 
six and twenty-five is twenty—you’ve lost 
almost twenty-five percent of the strength 
of the floor, because strength varies with the 
square of the depth. If the floor is two inches 
deep, why, you usually figure four for its 
strength. If it’s four inches deep, you usually 
figure sixteen for its strength. That’s roughly 
a try to explain that. We had quite a problem 
there in making sure that the floor was 
adequate and that it could be finished with a 
wearing surface that would stay. 

Oh, I was going to tell you about the band 
room. This band room [at Reno High] was 
to be in one end of the building. That’s the 
gymnasium end of the building. And there 
were some classrooms fairly close; within fifty 
or sixty feet, there was the first classroom. 
And we wanted to design a band room which 
would not interfere with classes (and I’ll tell 
you about [another] band room up here that 
did) and a band room at which the director 
could stand in a given spot and get the balance 
of his instruments much the same as they 
would be if he were in a big room. And we 
hired an acoustical expert for that. We put the 
band room on .a platform which insulated it 
from the reinforced concrete floors and walls. 
And then we had a directional acoustical 
treatment so that the area where the director 
was to stand was going to get the right balance 
of instruments (this is way over my head). 
And the walls, instead of being flat, there 
were a series of curved surfaces so that sound 
reflected from those walls would be broken 
up and would not be reinforced by focusing. 
And that band room turned out to be very 
successful. 

The other band room I’m thinking about 
was in the old Reno High School. They wanted 



78 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


a band room, and I designed a band room in 
which I had all of the plaster on spring clips. 
The lath was put on spring clips and then 
plastered over that, so that the walls would 
kill sound. But they wouldn’t let me take 
the windows out! So they got in there in the 
summertime and opened the windows and 
went to band practice. They might as well 
[laughing] have been right in the next room 
[laughing]. 

During that period, too, on the old Reno 
High School, I had to revamp their lobby 
with steel construction, take out the wooden 
construction that had existed, and the 
supports, and put a clear lobby in with steel 
construction, and yet do as little damage to 
the existing structure for repairs as possible. 

One of the things that we ran into was 
the fact that the tile in the lavatories was a 
three-by-six white tile which was not made 
any more. And it was quite evident that if we 
broke out any of that tile, there’d be a very 
considerable cost in replacing tile because 
it would have to be replaced for the whole 
lavatory, and there were two of them. And 
they were big. And we had quite a job in 
getting these big steel columns down. Oh, 
they went down within an inch of the tile, 
and they were so long that they had to be 
jockeyed down. And we didn’t break any of 
the tile [laughing]. 

The next high school we did was Wooster 
High School. And that was done as a campus 
high school, with covered walks. And the 
covers on the walks were used as the carriers 
for all of the piping and duct work between 
all buildings and the main building. 

In addition to that, we experimented with 
a rocky surface, pebble surface, on the exterior 
of the building on the theory that it would 
never have to be painted, that it would wear 
indefinitely, and that it could not be scarified, 
or marked on. Well, it made an attractive 


enough wall, and it certainly is durable, and 
you can’t scar it, but you can sure take a gun 
and shoot a lot of black and green and blue 
ink all over it, which they did—couldn’t stop 
them. 

We had a gymnasium there with a built-in 
stage. And also there, we had a little theater 
which seats two hundred and fifty people, and 
it’s been very useful. 

fly the way, this brings me back to Reno 
High School. At the time we did Reno High 
School, there was a great outcry for an 
auditorium. And we designed an auditorium 
for the Reno High School which would seat 
1,500 people, which was thought to be quite 
adequate at the time, And we took the design 
back to New York City, where my partner, who 
had been working for a large firm that did 
a great deal of theatrical work, had friends. 
And they took him to the Lunts, and the 
Lunts said, “If you build this theater in your 
high school, we will stop every show that we 
bring to the West Coast in Reno and put on 
a couple of performances because you have 
a stage which is sixty-five feet high (and it 
was 105 feet long). You can set a scene to roll 
on. You can set an original scene, lift it and 
drop another from above. You have adequate 
dressing rooms for any size company.” And 
we had, also, in there, a broadcasting booth 
on one side so that the radio people could get 
in, and it could be used for all sorts of public 
functions. At the second story, where the 
balcony was, it had good walking spaces for 
outdoors, and that sort of thing. 

Didn’t have the money for it. And probably, 
it wouldn’t have been adequate for too long, 
anyhow, at 1,500 people, you see. But it would 
have served the purpose for the ten years that 
we had been working with. 

Getting back to Wooster, it very soon 
became evident that the Wooster gym wasn’t 
large enough. We increased that in size. The 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


79 


mechanics of teaching in a campus-type 
building were proven to be acceptable. I don’t 
know of anything much—. That was a fairly 
smooth job. 

And then we got the Hug school, and we 
made a campus job out of that. And that was 
rather difficult on account of the terrain. It is 
on a hillside. But there again, I think it has 
proven acceptable. 

The libraries that we have provided, with 
the semicircular arrangement, have proven 
very good. 

We’ve had our work with the City of Reno. 
We have done nothing much for—what’d I do 
for the city of Reno? Two or three small jobs. 

Anyhow, we have recently done the 
legislative office building in Carson City, in 
which there are a number of innovations 
insofar as the routine usefulness provided 
and so far as the separation of the legislators 
from the public [are concerned]. In that 
building, the legislators will be able to go to 
their offices. There are offices—ten offices, 
I think— provided so that there are private 
offices when necessary. There are hearing 
rooms provided. And, of course, the legislative 
bureau is in there with all of the offices needed 
for its lawyers and research, and that sort of 
thing. As I say, all of these functions can be 
carried on without a legislator being collared 
in the hall by some constituent. 

I believe that the voting is to be done by 
computer, so that when a bill is to be voted 
on, you press your vote “yes” or “no,” and this 
cannot be changed. This eliminates the thing 
of holding back until you find out which way 
the vote is going and making up your mind 
which way you’re going to vote. You vote your 
convictions or your necessities or whatever 
the way you vote, and that’s it. It will give the 
vote return correctly and quickly, too. 

And we have good public address. We have 
good storage of pending bills and accessibility 


to the legislators of all pending bills. I’m not 
too familiar with that. I really would like to 
have you sit down with Graham Erskine and 
let him give you a rundown of that building 
because it is the result of a whale of a lot of 
study and comparison with buildings that are 
being built for other legislatures. 

And that goes also for the education 
building at the University of Nevada. This 
education building is for the education of 
teachers for this state. There’s quite a bit of 
computerizing in there. 

During the studies, Graham Erskine 
went back to Colorado someplace and 
studied the programming of computers 
in order that he might know something 
about what he was doing with them. Then 
he went to a seminar on the Coast of some 
two weeks, of thirty educators. He was the 
only “uneducated” man there [laughing]. 
They had two men from Great Britain and 
one from Canada, and what have you. They 
had an entirely different slant on teaching. 
One of the angles was that when you entered 
a course, you would be given a “true or 
false” examination on that course, a final 
examination. And if you could answer forty 
percent of the material, sixty percent of the 
material, or all of it, this determined how you 
would be approached by the teacher. People 
who did not need that course as part of the 
overall course they were taking would be 
promptly shifted, and there’d be no money 
spent on teaching them. This was being 
studied as a possibility for schools, that when 
you get bright students in and they need less 
instruction, you don’t waste time giving them 
instruction. And, of course, there are just 
about as many people against it as there are 
for it. And this probably won’t happen. But 
this is another reason that, with reference to 
these few things, I’d like to have you have a 
session with Graham. 



80 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Another thing that they came across 
was the fact that it was possible to throw 
an electromagnetic beam, which was like 
a wall, like this [gesture], and that that 
electromagnetic beam would stop sound. 
And another man, experimenting with a 
proposition to throw an electromagnetic or 
electro-something stop sign at cross sections 
from a machine, he’d throw it up there, and 
it would materialize as the word “stop” in the 
air. And he was successful in this. And they 
immediately said, “Well, if you can do this, 
then why can’t you throw a beam across that 
would be the equivalent of a wall that you 
couldn’t see through?” so if you had a beam 
winch would stop sound and you had a beam 
through which you could not see, you could 
take a great big room and you could make 
any setup of classrooms at any period that 
you wanted to. The only thing you’d have to 
be careful about is that when you got up and 
started to walk out of the room, you walk 
through these beams (they’re not there; it’s 
nothing), you don’t run into something and 
knock them flat [laughing). But these are 
interesting things that they’re working with. 
Whether anything’ll come of them or not, I 
don’t know, Well, that’s the schools. 

[I must have done a lot of studying on 
my own of educational methods and the 
needs of teachers and students, and so forth?] 
Well, the studies of education, I did not take a 
course, and I did not read any large books on 
education. And the reason I didn’t was that I 
could read one book and read another one, 
and they would nullify one another, negative 
one another. But in talking particularly with 
Earl Wooster, who, through the years, has 
been a good friend of mine—. 

There was Earl Wooster, [and] there was 
another man from Winnemucca who had 
been president of their schools [who] came 
in here as an understudy of Earl Wooster’s 


who was extremely helpful. And it was 
through association with these people and 
with the heads of departments, the Carson 
City school people, and then with school 
people that we met in California—. we 
took trips to California and went through 
schools and listened to these men talk about 
their educational problems, about their 
maintenance problems, building problems, 
a terrific mass of material which was applied 
at the time for the job on which we were 
studying. The material is in a warehouse 
someplace now. But it’s, of course, saved, the 
record of all those conversations and trips. But 
I don’t keep it. I was more or less tailing off. I 
wasn’t doing a lot of work at that time— that 
is, the physical work over the drawing board. 

A couple of other jobs. I was associated 
with the original architects as their Reno 
representative and supervision was the First 
National Bank building and the Pioneer 
Theater building. These were very interesting 
jobs, and this was a new procedure to me, to 
be a supervisor without authority. I simply 
notified the architect of my feelings about any 
situation that arose and left it up to him to 
take the action. And it was most interesting. 
And it was also very pleasant, both of those 
associations. And for our work on the First 
National Bank, we were awarded a certificate 
of merit by the AIA chapter of Pasadena. 
This was where the principal architects were 
located. There’s quite a lot of other work 
that I’ve done that I’ve thought about, and I 
don’t know where in the heck it slipped to. 
There’s hospitals I haven’t covered. We built 
hospitals in Elko, in—. Oh, tie had a housing 
development, 125 houses in Herlong [which] 
I forgot to tell you about. We built a hospital 
in Hawthorne. We built a hospital in Carson, 
Elko, Carson, Reno—one other hospital 
someplace. In that connection, we found that 
the health department of the State of Nevada 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


81 


was at one time very helpful. And then there 
came a change of authorities in which the 
man in charge of construction for the health 
department of the state was a man who had 
been our inspector on St. Mary’s Hospital, le 
was not a doctor, he was not a hospital builder, 
he was not an architect; he was just another 
guy. He applied for the job on the basis of 
his experience at St. Mary’s Hospital. That’s 
all the experience he had, under us. And he 
was absolutely—we tried to get him fired, 
and the sister said, “Oh, we wouldn’t do that.” 
So we had to live with him. He became the 
administrator, and he did not like us, with 
the result that we had a lot of trouble with the 
federal—what they call it, Health, Education, 
and Welfare— people because of his reports. 
And we had to go to San Francisco and correct 
things that he said. We couldn’t get approval 
of plans. They’d sit there for a month or so. 
He took all of the Hill-Burton funds and gave 
them to one outfit during one year, which, of 
course, slowed some stuff in Reno, too. 

So this is another problem of the architect. 
When you’re dealing with public authorities 
and committees and boards, if you could 
deal with the same board from start to finish 
of a job, this is one thing. But in any big job, 
your plans are apt to take anywhere from six 
months to a year. And in that six months to 
a year, you can find that some of the things 
that you specified and designed in the early 
portions of the job, particularly with respect to 
heating and ventilating equipment, have been 
discontinued—don’t make them any more. 
There have been such tremendous changes in 
air conditioning during that period that this 
happened several times to us. The equipment 
that we’d specified was not made any more, 
and they weren’t going to carry parts very 
long, either. So this required a change. 

Now, a change in heating and ventilating 
equipment, this is interesting. One man’s piece 


of equipment may have an inlet at the bottom 
and an outlet on the side. And the other may 
have an inlet on the top and an outlet on 
the end. And you’re trying to design a big 
fan room so that you can walk around in it. 
And great big ducts are going to be in certain 
places, and you can have corridors. And you 
suddenly have to change a piece of equipment, 
and your access and egress is covered with a 
big duct you have to put steps over, it makes 
quite [laughing] a lot of difference in the 
convenience of a facility. 

The other day, I was driving around the 
town. I passed two jobs that I’ve done that 
were specialties and that I thought were 
excellent. 

One was the Coca Cola bottling plant. 
And that is, I want to tell you a real specialty. 
Those bottles are washed, thousands of them 
at a time, washed and sterilized in a machine 
which is about ten feet square and forty feet 
long. They come out there in rows of sixteen 
bottles, and the sixteen bottles in one row 
and pushed out onto a conveyor that’s just 
that wide. And thy go on along here, and they 
come to a “magic eye” which rejects any bad 
bottles. For instance, if you just drop a pencil 
into one of those bottles as it goes by, and it 
comes to this magic eye, it’ll pull it right out. 
If it’s cracked, it’ll pull it right out. If the top is 
rough. Pull it right out. Then it goes through 
a machine that fills it with exactly the right 
amount of liquid. And these syrups—there’s 
just one syrup for all. They used to make their 
syrups by taking sugar and putting water with 
it. So now the syrups come in a tank and are 
pumped into a tank in the building. Those 
syrups then have a flavoring put with them, 
and they become orangeade, and they become 
Coca Cola, and they become this, that, and 
the other thing. So it goes through this filler, 
and then it goes through a topper, a machine 
that puts a top on them. And it goes onto a 



82 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


packager at the end of the line, and when the 
twenty-four bottles are all shoved in the right 
places, they’re dropped. And they go through 
twenty four slots and fall into a crate that has 
twenty four little squares. And that crate, then, 
is taken out on a conveyor belt, and the only 
time the stuff is touched, then, is when a man 
takes it off the crate and puts it on a dolly. As 
soon as the dolly is full, it turns right around 
and puts this stuff on a truck (and the trucks 
about thirty feet long; it’s a big truck), it pulls 
out and delivers the bottles, delivers the drink 
right now, just that fast. By the way, we had to 
maintain temperatures in this building. And 
this was not easy because they wouldn’t let 
us maintain temperatures in the warehouse. 
The warehouse was connected to the bottling 
plant. So in spite of any effect that the open 
warehouse might have on the bottling end 
of it, we had to maintain temperatures in the 
bottling end. [That required] a lot of study. 
And also we were dealing with a man who 
did not know the technical end of his work. 
He was the merchandiser and executive and 
all that and had become a millionaire with 
the business. But when it came down to the 
building and equipment, he had just depended 
on whoever he would hire as his engineer, and 
the engineers are competent—overall are 
competent—to fix a piece of equipment, and 
that’s about all. So we did have quite a problem 
with these people. We asked a question of 
them and they’d say, “Sure,” and then come 
back and say, “Never said it, never asked me 
that.” Well, they didn’t understand what they 
were asked, and they gave a quick just to get 
rid of it, thought, “Well, that guy’s taking care 
of it anyhow.” People have that attitude. And 
then the other one was a service facility for 
the Sierra Pacific power Company, well over 
a million dollars. We designed for them a 
circular building. And the roof overhung the 
entire circle by thirty feet so that they could 


load their equipment with their shovels and 
their ropes and everything you can think of 
that they might need for a power break in the 
summer, in the winter, in storm or sleet— 
anything. But it was dry and ready to go. This 
got quite the write-up in the power company 
magazines. And I think it has proven to be a 
very acceptable facility. But it was, again, a 
specialty, particularly with respect to traffic, 
and day and night operation, twenty four hour 
operation. And then we had also to erect a 
facility for the repair of their trucks because 
if something broke down, they might need 
every one of them the next minute. It had 
to be repaired, and fast. So there were two 
interesting jobs that we have done. 

The lawyers’ building—this was for 
Bowen, Reed. And they didn’t know exactly 
what they wanted. They wanted to build a 
building, and they wanted some lush offices, 
and they wanted a building that would pay 
for itself. So we did the building and they ran 
out of money, and they couldn’t pay for an 
adequate air conditioning job, and the result 
was that the air conditioning job did not 
function as they thought it would in a lush 
office—or should in a lush office. And they 
were pretty mad. But we have it working now. 

I built a microwave facility up on Peavine, 
which was also a very interesting job, 
particularity because of the weather, the 
extremes they have up there, and the fact 
that they did not need constant temperatures, 
and they did have to get rid of a great 
deal of condensation because they had a 
humid atmosphere inside the building, and 
sometimes, very cold and windy weather 
outside the building. This creates a lot of 
evaporation; the dew point is reached and 
water comes out that has to be cared for. Then 
across southern Nevada, we did a chain of 
microwave facilities, and they were, I think, 
on the order of thirty five to forty miles apart. 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


83 


And these are actually relays. Your electric 
impulses, as they go through the air, they 
loose their power. They become a little weaker 
and a little weaker. So at certain specified 
distances where they’re still complete and 
recognizable, they put in a relay which picks 
up the signal and amplifies it with additional 
power and then shoots it onto the next 
relay. This is almost instantaneous, that this 
increase in power is given to these things 
because electricity travels pretty fast. They 
were talking to me about a facility which was 
a pipe, underground, in which microwaves 
could be propagated, and there would—the 
microwaves are so infinitesimal. A microwave 
means [millions of] pulsations per second. 
Pulsation would be a rise to a maximum in 
one direction and a sink to a maximum in 
the other direction. And that’s called a cycle. 

Well, if you get, say, [a billion] of these 
in a pipe, you could send messages on a 
wavelength, and then you could separate that 
message from the next message by, we’ll say, 
[4,000] cycles. And you could get a whale of 
a lot of messages going through this pipe, I 
think (more than] six hundred messages at 
one time. And if you were sending something 
to Kansas City on wavelength C, and Kansas 
City was tuned to wavelength C, why, this 
thing would go through the pipe ’till it hit 
Kansas City, and Kansas City’d pick it off. But 
nobody else would pick it off because they 
wouldn’t be on that wavelength. I don’t think 
this ever came to pass. But it was at a time 
when they wanted to bury their transmitting 
facilities so that bombs and that sort of thing 
couldn’t interfere with them. 

And they have also put a string of 
microwaves across northern Nevada. And 
they have strings of microwaves in north 
and the south, too, and a couple or three in 
the middle, which means that if, for some 
reason, a facility was ruined, as happened 


in Nevada at Wendover, that you have other 
routes. You simply reroute those messages to 
another group or line of microwaves, So in 
wartime, in order to stop communications, 
somebody would have to get in here and 
bomb out quite a lot of facilities. And it’s also 
quite possible that if they bombed out one 
microwave station, they might simply splice 
the cable and bypass it. And the signal would 
be of sufficient strength by the time it got to 
the next facility to be built up again. So that 
was their theory. Well, the result of that is now 
that a goodly proportion of long distance calls 
go over the air most of the way and go through 
these microwave facilities. And you have your 
dishes; they’re parabolic dishes; they catch 
and focus these waves that come through the 
air. And they have directional facilities so that 
the waves don’t spread out in a great big circle 
like a rock going into a pond. 

Well, we did a couple of lines of those. We 
put one, for instance, on a mountain just out 
of Carson City. I can’t think of the name of 
that mountain. Anyhow, they do have and we 
did do a number of those facilities. 

Now, we did for the telephone company 
a facility on Center and First Street. And we 
designed those floors for one hundred and fifty 
pounds per square foot everyplace, including 
the roof. And in parts of the building where 
they were going to store batteries, which are 
very heavy, we designed this for two hundred 
and fifty pounds a square foot. And we had 
in the basement of this building electrical 
transmitting facilities, one cable of which 
might be worth $100,000 an hour—that is, in 
tolls for the messages that could go back and 
forth over the number of wires in this cable. 

And that had to be designed so that if the 
river flooded again that these would not be 
wet. They’re in the basement. So we had to put 
a floor in the basement of this building that 
would stand the pressure of seventeen feet of 



84 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


water. And seventeen feet of water is over a 
thousand pounds per square foot that would 
be pressing up. The walls, naturally, had to 
be watertight, and all joints between various 
parts of the building had to be waterproofed 
with copper dams and caulking, and that sort 
of thing. 

Shortly after we finished it, the telephone 
company began to go to these little bits of 
transistors. They figured that they could 
put all of the facilities that they needed as of 
now, plus a good many years of increase in 
business, in this one facility that we had built 
by changing from the more bulky equipment 
of the day to the transistored equipment 
which was coming into use. It just went so 
fast that we put two more stories on that 
building. It is now four stories. And on top 
of that building, then, we had to put up a 
very heavy steel platform with the dishes to 
pick up transmissions from both Mt. Rose 
and Peavine. 

The limitation in transmission, as of 
the present, has to do with the fact that 
the microwaves, the very small waves, as 
distinguished from radio waves, which are 
long waves—one, two, three, ten meters, 
and the microwaves may be a millionth of 
an inch. So you can [laughing) get a whale 
of a lot of material on a carrier wave, and 
a lot of messages when you get the proper 
equipment to start them on their way, and 
to pick the messages off. So there was that 
facility for the telephone company, and 
we also built for the telephone company a 
central office building out on Pueblo. And 
this was somewhat technical, too, because 
the telephone company has to be able to get 
out and in the country real fast from time 
to time. 

The most delicate thing with work for the 
telephone company, when you’re working 
around their transmitting apparatuses, are 


these cables. And if you should damage 
one of them so that it could not be used for 
three or four days, a tremendous amount of 
money would go down the drain, as far as the 
telephone company is concerned. So they have 
their cables under water across the oceans, 
and they have their microwave transmission 
over the continents, and they also have the 
satellites. And these remarkable things now 
are giving us television from Europe. 

Things travel so fast. The developments 
have been so speedy in all lines of work, 
and particularly in our experience with 
the telephone work. We had, on this same 
facility, on Center Street and First Street— 
Lake Street and First Street, it is. The Center 
Street and First Street was the original 
building, and we put the building on Center 
and Lake, which took the rest of the block. 
The heating apparatus for our new facility 
had a smokestack at approximately the 
roof—on the first unit we built of the original 
building. And it was a very efficient plant. 
There was very little smoke showing when 
the plant started up. But the air conditioning 
equipment in the original building on Center 
Street was pulling in air at such a rate that 
bits of smoke and soot from our building 
were being drawn in. And those little bits of 
soot, coming down on this apparatus, which 
is very delicate, began to interfere with their 
transmission, with the result we had to put 
up forty feet more of smokestack, in order to 
keep this building from drawing the smoke 
from our building in. 

Another thing about that new building— 
when they set up the test for the air 
conditioning, it started pulling in gnats. Well, 
the intake on this Lake Street building for air 
conditioning was, I should say, six feet wide 
and twelve feet high. And it had filters and 
screens—everything you could think of. No 
bird could get through it. No bug could get 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


85 


through it. No mosquito could get through it. 
Everything’s just fine. 

These gnats swarm at about the height 
of that intake when they’re—I guess they’re 
in season at certain times of the year 
[laughing]—I don’t know. And by golly, they 
just went through that little screen! And 
they got into the duct work, and then the 
duct work, where one duct came against the 
other duct, and they had to flange, and then 
you riveted the flange, and this was the thing 
up here, down here [gestures], and then this 
little two flanges down, you riveted them. The 
men who serviced the air conditioners got in 
these ducts and walked in them. They were big 
ducts, such that men—. And as they walked 
on the sheet metal, it sagged; it would begin 
to sag a little bit between the rivets. And that 
very small space, the bugs went through, the 
gnats. The result was that we got a call from 
one of the executives of the company who 
had an office in the basement. He was quite 
profane because when he came to work in 
the morning, the whole top of his desk was 
covered with gnats [laughing]! And we had 
quite a time eliminating that. We had to 
make everything almost watertight in order 
to eliminate those gnats. 

Well, that’s a different type of facility. Our 
schools— oh, there’s one I wanted to tell you 
about the schools. Hug High School. When 
we took bids on Hug High School, and the 
price of the high school, the bid price of 
the high school was in the neighborhood 
of four million dollars, we got two bids, 
exactly alike to the penny. These bids were 
prepared separately without any collusion— 
one man from Las Vegas and one man from 
Reno. And when the bids were opened, two 
of them were exactly alike to the penny. 
Nobody knows of this having happened in 
the state of Nevada, although somebody 
said he knew it happened someplace else 


once. Mid as a matter of fact, two or three 
fellows have suddenly remembered that this 
happened— $9,461,000.19 [laughing]. 

But anyhow, the problem that arose, then, 
was who is going to get the job? And the 
man from Las Vegas hired a lawyer and an 
engineer, and he made some claims that the 
specifications for the excavation and grading 
were not specific enough, and that had he bid 
the job the way his competitor bid the job, 
he would have been low. And then he had a 
couple of other angles that he cooked up out of 
the back of his head someplace. And they had 
a big meeting of the high school board and 
their lawyers, and everybody in the country 
was there. 

So they let this man present his case. We, 
as the architects for the board, were also of 
the opinion that if it was a tie, the local man 
up here was the man to get it because he 
had the advantage of being local. He had the 
advantage that most of his subcontractors 
were local and could get on the job faster. And 
we felt this was a reasonable attitude. And on 
the other hand, a reasonable attitude has to do 
with if you build a school in Washoe County, 
Washoe County people ought to do the work. 
That’s what the building industry thinks, too. 
And a failure to have given that job to the 
local contractor would have created all kinds 
of political byplay. 

So in spite of the fact that we had a 
hearing, this local man was going to get the 
job. So as soon as all the presentations had 
been made, somebody on the school board 
moved that the job be given to the local man, 
and it was seconded and voted, and they said, 
“Good-bye, sir.” 

And then this contractor who had raised 
Cain came to me, and he said, “I think that was 
fair enough.” He said, “Maybe I shouldn’t’ve 
protested. But I was disappointed and pretty 
mad, and,” he said, “I had to do something” 



86 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


[laughing]. So he created quite a bit of trouble. 
Well, that’s another job. 

It’s funny that I don’t think of these jobs 
except maybe at night when I’m lyin’ in bed. 
I think, “I should’ve told about that,” because 
we have a lot of jobs all over the state. And 
they have come and gone and been forgotten. 
I’ll tell you one thing that makes you forget a 
job. At the end of ten years, you button up a 
whole gob of drawings and specifications and 
what have you and put them in the dump. 
And when you do that, you also dismiss the 
job. There’s nothing more you can do about it. 
Twenty-five years after I did the El Cortez, they 
called me up and asked me for the drawings 
so they could make some improvements 
in remodeling in the El Cortez. Well, those 
drawings had been thrown away. You can’t 
keep those drawings around. They get bigger 
and bigger. I was in the Oakland building 
department one time, and we went in to find 
a drawing of a big building. We had a code 
question coming up. And they had a whole 
floor, floor to ceiling, stuffed with paper. They 
couldn’t find anything! They didn’t have it 
properly indexed. People had come, looked at 
something, and put it back in the wrong place 
over the years, and it had become a mess. And 
the result was it cost them nearly $30,000 to 
take these plans and look them over and throw 
away those that they could dispense with and 
to adopt a policy of destroying plans after a 
certain time, except in large buildings, and 
that sort of thing; they kept those. 

I would like to talk about how it is to 
work with the state planning board.] The state 
planning board, when it was organized, had a 
secretary-manager who was not an architect; 
he probably was an engineer. I don’t think his 
education was complete. My partner got at 
odds with him, called him stupid, one thing 
and another, and raised such Cain that it was 
trouble for the planning board to give us a job. 


About that time, too, we had been 
given the job of the Student Union. The 
then president of the University was a 
very [laughing] —don’t want to say—he 
was very positive that he knew everything 
about everything, and he demanded—very 
demanding—that certain things be done with 
the Student Union. And this job, Graham 
was handling. T didn’t get into it until the 
later stages, and then I distrusted the job as 
being too expensive. Well, it not only was 
too expensive, it was double the amount of 
money that was available. And there was an 
immediate thought about suing us for delay 
in the building and that we had to change the 
plans and get it down to fit the budget. And 
they then at that time had a man in charge of 
construction for the University, a buildings 
and grounds manager, who was also rather 
arbitrary. He had quite a time getting that job 
cut down to the point where they could build 
it. The result was they only had a piece of a 
facility, which, of course, brought on severe 
criticism, too. 

The upshot of that was that we were too 
troublesome to do work for the planning 
board and that they would prefer to do work 
with other architecture firms that perhaps 
weren’t as well qualified as we were because 
they would be pleasanter to do work with. 
And this is a proper attitude, too. So, the 
next job they gave us was an addition to the 
Student Union, and we got it because we 
had the drawings of the original and were 
familiar with the original. They weren’t too 
happy about giving it to us then, and trouble 
developed between my partner and the Board 
of Regents and the then secretary of the board. 
So the Board, as it’s presently constituted, with 
its present secretary (I think he was there 
at the time), laid out a ten- or fifteen-year 
construction program for the University. And 
they gave us the Education building we’re 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


87 


doing today, which was the fortieth project on 
the list, and was expected not to come up for 
ten or fifteen years, which eliminated us very 
happily from raising any more Cain. 

Well, the time is up. The job came up, 
and immediately, the University called in 
two other architects to talk about the job. 
We didn’t even know they were considering 
it. Rut the then planning board chairman (I 
guess he still is), Bert Fitz, said, “9e gave this 
job to Ferris and Erskine, and they’re going 
to do it. It’s their job.” 

So we have about—I think we have 
completed the plans and specifications for 
the job. And I think that Graham Erskine, my 
partner, has learned a pretty good lesson over 
the years. I think he has done an excellent job. 
And I think that they like the job he’s done 
and the contacts they’ve had with him. And 
if they do, he may qualify for some of the 
future work with the state planning board. 
They have large sums of money to spend for 
this state. However, when it became necessary 
to appoint some architects to compete for a 
new $6,000,000 gymnasium, Mr. Erskine was 
not mentioned. So there probably is some 
residue. 

Now, the state planning board are very 
happy with the legislative building in Carson. 
I don’t know what the reaction of the Carson 
people will be. It’s a plain building. It had to be 
plain, if you were going to get it for the money 
that was available. We had the state planning 
board to satisfy, we had the legislative building 
committee, or whatever they were called, to 
satisfy, and we had to meet the budget, or else. 
In meeting the budget, we had to take a base 
bid on .a portion of the building that we felt 
would really meet the budget. When we had 
alternate bids, additive bids, that if we were 
to add this section to the building, so much 
additional money. If we were to include full 
air conditioning, so much additional money. 


If we were to include all elevators, so much 
addition, so on. 

Well, the result was, of course, that we 
were able to get a contract let for that building 
for the amount of money. You must let a 
contract for the amount of money budgeted 
by a governmental agency. You cannot let it for 
one cent more. And this, I don’t understand. 
If it was one cent more, they would require 
that you change the plans and take a new 
bid, costing a lot of money to the contractors 
and to the state. But that is the law, and 
perhaps it’s a good one. It certainly protects 
the people from a lot of graft that sometimes 
goes on—not in this state necessarily, but in 
the industry. 

That building just [recently) was dedicated; 
that is, the cornerstone was laid. And it will 
be finished, I think, sometime in the fall. And 
that’s going to be practically a two-year job in 
finishing it. Many interesting things came up 
in that building, but you will have a talk with 
Graham Erskine, and he’ll give you some, I 
think—a most interesting account of both that 
building and the Education building. They’re 
both very complicated, very interesting jobs. 
He lives with the jobs. He works night and 
day. He’s a hard working man. If he just had 
the personality, he’d be the leading architect 
in this area, believe me; he’d be doing work in 
other states, too. 

At the time they built the J. C. Penney 
building (that’s on the corner of First and 
Sierra), there was coming into the picture, 
construction picture, tilt-up slabs. In other 
words, you’d pour slabs on the ground, let 
them harden, and then haul them up and 
put them in place and put in a whole section 
of wall without form work or anything in a 
very short time. Also, there was coming into 
gradual acceptance what they called a flat slab 
floor, which is a slab that just sets down on 
top of a column. It doesn’t have beams this 



88 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


way and this way [gesturing] to support it. It’s 
supported just on the top of the column. And 
it has to have the type and kind of reinforcing 
that will take care of the stresses and strains 
in a circular area around that column ’till the 
next column picks up and takes over. 

Well, the J. C. Penney Company was 
designed that way, and very shortly after 
they put Sin their fixtures, they found that 
their fixtures were sloping. They weren’t level 
any more, and there were cracks underneath 
the fixture between the fixture and the floor. 
So I received a call to go and see if the floor 
was safe. Well, what happens is—almost 
completely technical. I don’t know whether I 
can explain it or not. When you have a beam 
carrying a load, you put steel in the bottom 
of the beam because the beam tends to sag 
like that [gesturing], and naturally, this is a 
tensile pull. You can see it when you [bend] 
your hands, how it pulls the skin. So you put 
steel down there, because masonry has no 
tensile strength. And in the top of the beam, 
the masonry itself has great compressive 
strength, and you can see, also, that if you 
bend something, this is shortened. And in 
shortening, it puts a lot of compressive force 
into the material. Since this is flexible, no 
force there, but in flexible material, it puts a 
lot of compression in. So that is the beam and 
column system. Now, with the floor system, 
flat slab, you have that same beam and column 
until the floor begins to sag a little bit. 

Now, everything that you build moves. 
Steel moves, concrete moves, everything 
moves with changes of temperature and 
contraction and expansion, and all that sort 
of thing. So in setting, the concrete shrinks a 
little bit. And the tendency is for the floor to 
sag a little bit. And this sag comes from load, 
too. When you load a floor, it sags. Any floor 
that you put even a pound on sags. You can’t 
tell the sag, but it will sag. It sags and bends. 


Well, the thin floor in a long span can 
sag quite a lot, having only a very slight 
effect on each of the beams, whereas a big 
one that sags a lot has a big effect on the 
top. And as it has this sagging effect and 
the compression comes in the top and the 
tensile in the bottom, pretty soon the tensile 
strength in the bottom is taking practically 
all of the load. In other words, it becomes a 
string, like the cables of one of these bridges, 
of the Golden Gate Bridge, for instance. 
That cable sags down. That bridge moves as 
much as nineteen feet in high windstorm, 
and in hot weather and cold weather, and 
what have you. 

Another little explanation of that same 
thing was that when they built the Bay bridge, 
they became quite exercised because the 
platform on which they were going to build 
the rails for the trolley cars that were going 
across there was about six feet too high. And 
then they finally decided, “Well, we haven’t 
put the weight of the rails and the roadbed on 
it. And when we do, it’ll come down.” Well, six 
feet in a three or four thousand-foot span is 
almost nothing, whereas six feet in a ten-foot 
span would break everything up and put it 
back into gravel and sand (laughing], 

So what happens with these flat slab 
floors is that they become supported by a 
string of steel, flow, the question is, is that 
steel strong enough, without the assistance 
of the concrete above, to hold the load? Well, 
this floor had sagged three and a half inches 
in twenty-some feet. So we simply took an 
instrument in there, took the worst bay. We’ll 
say that the columns are twenty-five feet on 
center, so it’d be a square of twenty-five feet. 
And we strung copper wires very tightly in 
a grid, back and forth, with little squares. 
Then we loaded that floor with double the 
load that it was supposed to have by putting 
cement sacks on it, double the load required 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


89 


for design by the code, which is .a hundred 
pounds a square foot on it. And then, because 
we have this leveled grid of copper wires, we 
can measure down every two feet and see what 
has happened to the floor after it was loaded. 
We measure down and see where it is before 
we load it, and then we measure and see what 
happened after we load it. The floor didn’t 
move particularly. So the floor was perfectly 
safe structurally, but an awful thing to lay 
nice, straight cabinets on. And so we had to 
say the floor was safe. I don’t know what they 
finally did with it. 

Those are some of the little things that 
come along in an architect’s life, and they’re 
very interesting as you’re working on them. 
And your engineers, of course—this engineer 
was from San Francisco, and his reputation 
was at stake, and he was very much involved 
in these tests. He was right there to try and 
see that everything was done the right way, 
and that the right results were written up, 
and that he was cleared absolutely. Well, he 
was cleared. 

I did a job that I thought was very 
interesting. Now, maybe I should cover this— 
well, I’m going to cover it right now. I did for 
Harold’s Club a seven-story addition, which 
was only twenty-five feet wide. Seven stories 
high, and it was oriented at right angles to the 
prevailing winds so that it got the full effect 
of our stronger winds, tending to turn it over. 
Well, about the middle of the design period, 
Harold’s Club wanted to increase the size of 
the top three stories. They said, “We want to 
overhang ten feet to the north.” 

Well, we said, “We have the wind coming 
from the other side trying to tip this thing 
over. Now you want to put three stories of 
heavy concrete construction on the north 
side, which will tend, again, to tip it over.” And 
it makes quite a serious construction problem. 
I said, “You can work it out.” 


Our engineer at the time was Hal Engle of 
Santa Rosa, a man who had been a fee man— 
had been a salaried man and later a fee man 
for the Board of Underwriters of the Pacific 
with respect to earthquakes and earthquake- 
resistant structures. And he was able to design 
this building to resist earthquakes as the code 
required. The code does not say you can make 
earthquake-proof buildings, but it says you 
can make a building earthquake-resistant 
with respect to the experience of this area 
in earthquakes so that damage will not be 
extensive. He designed these footings so that 
this building was safe. 

And this building became a conversation 
piece among earthquake engineers all over 
the United States. And at their convention 
in Seattle, this was one of the buildings 
which was discussed in detail. They were all 
interested in the design of the building in 
order to do this thing—with your prevailing 
winds here and your overhang here tending 
to tip a building which is seven stories high 
and only twenty-five feet wide! Of course, we 
haven’t had an earthquake since it was built, so 
we don’t know [laughing]. We do know that 
the building, being alongside the old Harold’s 
Club building, has never settled the slightest 
bit. The floors are still equally high, and so 
forth, and it’s, so far, been a successful piece 
of construction. 

In this regard, there was an interesting 
incident in Los Angeles during one of their 
earthquakes. A new hotel had been built down 
there, and it had been designed to resist just 
about anything in the way of an earthquake 
that could take place. But all of the elements of 
resistance were of structural steel. Then they 
put masonry on the structural steel supports 
and on the interior. I believe they had gypsum 
block walls; it was fireproof; it was just about 
everything you can think of as far as being a 
safe building. 



90 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Along came an earthquake, and it just 
cracked those plaster walls and those partitions 
all over the place. And it was discovered then 
in an investigation why this happened, that 
when you do a steel building which could be 
absolutely safe as far as collapse—as far as 
actual change in size— it will rattle back and 
forth, all right, because steel is a fairly elastic 
and ductile material. There’s a lot of give to it. 
You, yourself, know how spring steel is made, 
and that sort of thing. But masonry is not. 
So while the building moved back and forth 
with this earthquake in its steel structures, 
all it did to the masonry structures was crack 
them. And half a million dollars was the 
cost of putting it back in shape, which now 
has led to the establishment of many joints 
in masonry work so that there isn’t a great, 
long, continuous structure of masonry which 
can be changed to the point where it cracks. 
But there’re a series of smaller expansions of 
masonry that can give at those joints as they 
move and not crack anyplace. Well, this isn’t 
perfect, but it’s a lot better than we did have. 

[I was going to tell about some of the 
things I did in giving expert testimony.] 
Well, expert testimony, as such, was largely 
a question of getting on the stand and the 
lawyer would start to qualify you as an expert. 
And the judge would say, “Hell, I know him,” 
and that was that; you’re qualified. I remember 
this Nevada State Life Insurance Company 
used to own the building on the corner of 
Second and Center, which is now only three 
stories tall, called the Professional Building, 
or something. It was five stories then. It was 
an Odd Fellows lodge building. And it had an 
elevator in there, which was one of the early 
elevators. They didn’t have safety doors, arid 
all that sort of thing on it—no doors at all on 
it, as a matter of fact. Anyhow, this mailman 
was delivering mail up and down. But he 
rode in the elevator. Bad without the doors, 


of course, the ledges at the floor stuck out a 
little further than the elevator shaft, not much, 
but a little. And as the elevator went up, he has 
his foot hanging over that edge carelessly, and 
the elevator cut it—came up to the floor, and 
it cut his foot off, across, like that [across the 
instep]. And he was a man about seventy or 
so years of age, and as a result, he died. 

So the Nevada State Life Insurance 
Company was sued for, I think, $16,000 or 
$15,900, something of the sort. And Buddy 
Longnecker, who was in charge of Nevada 
state Life at the time (I guess he was—he 
might’ve owned it; anyhow, he was the 
manager. He was the president, is what he 
was), he hired me as an expert witness. So 
I made a drawing of the entire shaft, with 
all the doors and everything, and that, of 
course, was up on a board. And we came 
to court. And Summerfield, the old man, 
Sardis Summerfield, was the attorney. And 
he wanted to talk about the door where the 
accident happened. I had a large scale of the 
door, like the door’s so high and so wide on a 
drawing, you know, with every little detail— 
even defects in the woodwork show. For three 
days, we talked about that door—morning 
and afternoon. He was trying—and I’d been 
trying to think about what he wanted me to 
say. I knew the point he wanted to make. And 
I can’t think of it now. But I wasn’t going to 
make it for him. And there we sat. He was 
determined that I should say some certain 
thing, which I don’t recollect now. And from 
every angle of approach he could think of, 
from every silly question he could conjure 
up, he tried to make me say that thing, and 
for three days I didn’t say it. And he finally 
let me off the stand, and as I walked by his 
table, why, he said to his pal who’d been 
sitting alongside him all this time, “The hell 
with him [laughing]!” After three days. He 
was sure going to make me say—. He was 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


91 


a determined, stubborn man. Now, wait a 
minute! He was [laughing]! 

What else was Ion the stand about? I’ve 
been on the stand so many times. The last time 
was in Judge [Grant Bowen]— he’s running 
for election now, plays golf all the time. I was 
in his court. And the lawyer was [George] 
Vargas’ partner. And I was qualified, as usual. 
And then they talked about our pinochle 
game. The lawyer said, “I play lots of pinochle 
with him, and he’s not very honest there, but I 
expect him to be honest on the stand!” 

That’s the sort of thing in these courts— 
in the old days in these courts, it was 
conversational more than anything. I suppose 
there were times when they really went to 
town with the rhetoric. But in the cases that 
I have been on, it was largely a conversational 
thing. I was not questioned as if I really 
remembered what I was saying. Or if I wanted 
to think about that again and do it over, they 
ask me a question, I gave them an answer, 
and that was that. And pretty soon, I was all 
through, and then I had left. 

Well, I’ve been trying to think of what I 
have been in court about. I’ve been in court 
about condemnations. I’ve been in court 
for some—never in a libel suit. [I’ve] been 
in court for damage suits, a couple or three 
of them. I guess I haven’t been in court too 
much. But the court out in Austin, when 
this—who the heck was the district attorney 
in Austin? He was in here as a judge for a 
long time, an Italian, [A. J. Maestretti]. His 
daughter was a fine pianist. 

Well, I’ll tell you a little story about him 
[laughing]. I was fifteen minutes late for 
jury Duty. And he stood me up in front of 
the court and everybody and just ate me up 
but good. And I was plenty mad, but I was 
also a little cagey. Maestretti, big, fat, wide. I 
knew him out in Austin so well. And I built 
the high school out there. He was district 


attorney, and he entertained me, and we 
liked one another. But for some reason, he 
decided to make an example of me in this 
jury duty thing. 

Well, he lived cut on Lander Street [Reno], 
and I got a call one day (I guess it was from 
an installer of these space heaters), that at 
such and such an address, they had connected 
two space heaters into one chimney, which 
is against the law. And you’re not supposed 
to connect anything to a chimney without 
having an inspection by the city building 
department anyhow. So I went out here, and it 
was Maestretti’s home. I knocked on the door. 
He was there. I went in and I said, “ 1 came out 
to have a look at your chimney.” 

Says, “Sure. Got two of ’em. Which one 
you want to look at?” 

And I see the space heater. I said, “This 
one here.” 

And I found that there were two space 
heaters hooked into the chimney. So I said 
to the judge, “Now, this is a misdemeanor.” 

“What’s a misdemeanor?! [Don’t] tell me 
what a misdemeanor is. I know the law!” 

I said, “You have hooked two space heaters 
into this chimney, and I’m going to have to 
issue a complaint.” 

Well, he hit the ceiling. And when he got 
through, I hit the ceiling for him. And I really 
bawled him out for going ahead and doing 
work without asking for a permit to do it and 
without having inspection for it when he, as 
he just told me, “Knew the law.” He must have 
done this with malice aforethought, and he 
certainly was guilty of breaking the law, and 
da-de-da. 

Well, when I got all through, [laughing] 
I was about to leave, the judge says, “Monk.” 

[Laughing] And I looked around and 
said, “What?” 

He said, “We even?” [Laughing] Oh, 
brother! 



92 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


I think you’ll have to pass the expert 
witness thing because, as I told you, in my day, 
I was an expert witness by general acceptance, 
not because I was particularly expert or had 
had a whale of a lot of experience. But I was 
one of the few guys around in my business, so I 
was an expert. And I was treated with respect; 
I was practically never badgered. [George] 
Vargas is the only guy that ever tried to badger 
me, and he didn’t try very hard. I’ve forgotten 
what I said to him, something that the judge 
could have slapped my wrist for. But in any 
case, he grinned, and that was all there was 
to it. But I have never been subjected in court 
to yelling and badgering. This Summerfield, 
he was just as calm at the end of three days 
as he had been in the beginning, same tone 
of voice, and so forth. And I think he could 
lull you to sleep unless you were a little bit 
hot about the whole thing. That sort of thing 
gets you a little bit madder every ten minutes. 
Never quit, never quit—just like the Chinese 
torture with the drops on your head. 

Alongside the Nimitz highway in Oakland 
about five years ago or six years ago, I built a 
bakery f or the Fitzpatrick Baking Company. 
And it was my first view of a modern bakery. 
This setup is one of seventy-odd bakeries that 
are owned by a holding company in Texas. 
These bakeries are worth an average of ten 
to twelve million dollars apiece. This means, 
largely, the machinery; the building is a minor 
part of the cost. It’s the machinery that goes 
in these buildings that is the costly element. 
These people, the owners (financers is what 
they are; they own the bulk of the stock; they 
don’t own all of it), they set the program for 
each bakery in each area. And, of course, 
they make the studies of the population 
and of the competition. If, for instance, it 
became necessary to meet cut prices from 
some competing bakery, they can drop the 
prices of any one of their bakeries below any 


price that any competitor can make because 
they’re going to split that difference between 
seventy-odd bakeries. It’s a small difference, 
really, and it doesn’t hurt any of the bakeries. 
So the fellow that’s in trouble gets a lot of help 
from all over the United States. It’s rather 
rough on the people, for instance, in this 
particular bakery. The San Jose bakeries and 
the Fresno and Stockton bakeries got together 
and came up to cut in on the San Francisco 
business with cut prices. And this boy just 
simply undercut them, and in a matter of two 
or three months, the whole thing was all over. 
The prices were back up again [laughing]. 

But going back to this bakery, the flour 
that goes into the breads and confections is 
delivered in bulk in tanks. And it’s dumped 
into a great, large tank, which, of course, 
is completely waterproof, protected from 
moisture of all kinds, and that sort of thing. 
And the flour is blown by air from there 
into the mix through pipes. It’s blown first, 
of course, onto a container on a scales so 
that exactly the right weight of flour He 
deposited]. And there’s an allowance for the 
weight of the air that may have come in, extra. 
This is, I suppose, on the order of a tenth of a 
percent. The shortening, which was usually a 
solid (at least, it was a gelatinous substance) 
is now all liquid, and it’s pumped into the 
mix, by weight, of course. And this mix is 
dumped into huge mixers that hold 1,500 
pounds of dough at a time. They’re about 
fifteen feet high, or more. And they take this 
1,500 pounds of stuff, and their big arms go 
around and mix it, and I [mean] realty mix 
it. Then a tub, which is about ten feet long 
and, we’ll say, two feet six wide and around 
four feet deep is on an elevator arrangement 
alongside this mixer. And the elevator takes 
it to the right spot and the mixer dumps this 
1,500 pounds of dough into this tub. And it 
fills the tub about halfway, or less. The tub is 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


93 


then put under a cover, and I don’t understand 
just what goes on underneath there, I didn’t 
mention the yeast has also been put into this 
mix. In four hours, this tub is not half full. It 
is completely filled. The dough has risen, and 
it’s completely full. 

Now, this immediately goes to another 
mixer, and this dough is the basis of bread. 
Now, you can put flavoring in it; you can 
put raisins in it; you can vary it in various 
ways. And, of course, you can also have 
different kinds of flours. But at one time, 
the flour in the tank must be used up. And 
it comes out of this machine and is cut off 
in chunks, I should say about like a four- 
inch cube—yeah, about like a four-inch 
cube, and it comes onto a rotating wheel, a 
flat wheel, that’s slightly sloped. And it runs 
around that several times and becomes a 
ball. And as it becomes a ball, it is sliding 
down this—because the wheel is sloped to 
the edge, it’s sliding down it. And finally, 
it comes out onto a conveyor belt. This 
conveyor belt takes it through another—it’s 
not an oven, doesn’t heat; there’s no heat in 
it, I don’t think. Something happens to this 
dough there which has to do with the kind 
of bread you’re going to make, or sometimes 
you make stuff that are twisted, and it will 
come out in a long, small, round place. And 
men, by hand, then, give it two twists. Or it’ll 
come out as just this circular thing, and it is 
deposited in pans the size of a bread loaf, one 
in each pan. And those pans are in bunches 
of ten. And the minute ten pans are filled 
with this dough, they’re shoved into an oven, 
and ten more pans come along on the belt. 

This oven is ninety feet long, and it has 
two passes. You go this way [gesturing to the 
left], and you raise up and you come back 
ninety feet. So it’s a hundred and eighty feet 
of travel, and it takes about an hour to go 
through the oven. 


When the bread comes out, it is cooked. 
It is completely baked. But it’s very hot. So it 
goes onto another belt, and at this point—this 
is one of the few points at which human hands 
touch this bread. One, the first point, is in case 
you have the twisted dough, there are men 
who stand there and give it a couple of twists. 
At this other point, when the pans come out 
of the oven and fall onto the belt, sometimes 
the pan turns over on its side, doesn’t sit on 
its bottom. In that case, there’s a man who just 
rights it, and that’s all he does. 

Now, these pans go into a tower, which, I’ll 
say, is twenty feet square and perhaps thirty 
feet high. The conveyor belt goes around it in 
a sort of a circle. When it comes out of that 
tower, it has been then cooled down to one 
hundred degrees or less. And the reason for 
cooling it is that you can’t slice the hot bread. 
Rut at a hundred degrees or less, they can slice. 
And it runs through a sheer, which just does 
this [slicing gesture], and it’s cut; one pass, 
and it’s cut into any number of slices of bread. 

From there, it goes along (within just a 
few feet) to a wrapper. And it is completely 
wrapped by a machine. If it should happen to 
be that you’re cooking buns, they come out in 
batches of four. And when they come to this 
wrapper, it is then set up with bags. And a bag 
is put in place, and compressed air is blown 
into the bag so that it’s just wide open. And a 
woman stands there, and she shoves four of 
these inside the bag. The bag is immediately 
run into some kind of a thing; it’s twisted a 
couple or three times, and it’s all wrapped and 
ready to go. 

Well, these things go into pans that are, 
I should say, two loaves wide and, say, five 
loaves long, ten loaves to a pan. And those 
go out on this conveyor belt to the garage. 
And in the garage, they have dollies that 
have perhaps a dozen shelves. A dolly is just 
a four-wheel thing that can hold any kind of 



94 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


material and be pushed around. And this one 
can hold about fifty pans of bread. And it’ll 
weigh a thousand pounds loaded. And they 
shove this into the truck. 

Now the truck is backed up against the 
bakery, against a soft foam rubber gasket, 
which is about eighteen inches square and 
goes all the way around the truck, so that 
when the truck backs up, its edge, its sides 
and bottom and top, are all jammed into this 
foam rubber gasket. The doors are open, and 
the temperature of the truck, which is then 
not been necessarily at seventy-five degrees 
(which is the temperature at the bakery at 
all times)—. The temperature is seventy-five 
degrees in the bakery, the humidity just so, 
and everything is controlled. Not even a 
sharp corner is in a bakery, and certainly, 
no little pockets of any kind where flour or 
dust or anything else could rest. There are 
no corners where things can set. Well, it gets 
into this truck, and when the truck is finally 
loaded, it takes off for wherever they’re selling 
bread. They have about a thirty-mile radius 
for a bakery, sixty-mile diameter they cover. 
And they deliver this bread to the outlet, the 
retail outlet. 

The next day, when they come down, 
they’ll have another load of bread. And they 
pick up all of the bread that wasn’t sold the 
day before, put it in the truck, and take it back 
to the bakery, where they maintain a stale 
bread store. And that stale bread is sold at a 
cheaper price, and many people buy the stale 
bread. It’s not really stale; it’s perfectly edible 
bread. It’s soft in everyway. But, nevertheless, 
they sell it, and one of the reasons they sell 
it, I’m sure, is because it’s a very profitable 
venture and because it is much better to keep 
making a lot of bread and putting in the retail 
outlets and selling in stale bread stores what’s 
left than it’d be to cut down their production. 
This is an additional outlet. And this stale 


bread outlet goes to farmers who want to feed 
pigs and chickens. They can buy a truckload 
of this bread. And, of course, people buy the 
bread, too, at these cut rate prices, and this 
is one of the very profitable departments of 
the bakery. 

Of course, the—the health department 
is looking down their nose every minute. 
Everything you do is subject to inspection. For 
instance, the floor in this bakery. These trucks, 
dollies, we call them, with steel wheels, are 
about ten feet long, and they’re, I think, two 
loaves wide. They’re a good eight feet high. 
And they weigh, loaded, up to a thousand 
pounds. So they push those along on the 
floor for various reasons and from place to 
place, and what have you. And a concrete 
floor will be cut to pieces in the matter of a 
couple of years by the steel wheels. So they put 
down a brick floor, exceedingly hard, baked 
brick, made only in one place in the United 
States, and put down only by crews from the 
manufacturer. That floor will go into every 
bakery that is built until such time as they 
are able to retire the dollies with steel wheels. 
They’ve got a heck of a lot of them and a lot 
of money invested, and they’re going to use 
them ’till they’re no good. As soon as they 
retire them, they’re going to rubber wheels, 
and then they’ll have cheaper floors. 

[Laughing] You run into so many of these 
little items. The business of selling bread—a 
bakery has always been just a place where 
you baked bread, as far as I was concerned. 
But these bakeries are automated to the nth 
degree, and they are absolutely sanitary. They 
have curing rooms f or bread. 

Oh, I think I overlooked one spot! I think 
these batches of dough go into a room for 
twenty-four hours with a certain temperature 
before they come out and set down here and 
raise up so much. Maybe they raise up in 
there. I’d forgotten that very little thing. 



Some of My Important Architectural Jobs 


95 


But they make buns, and they make 
bread, and they can make raisin bread. I don’t 
think that this bakery makes whole wheat 
[bread], but I couldn’t be sure about that. 
I think they can do anything they want to 
do in any amount that they want to do, and 
I’ve forgotten how many hundred thousand 
loaves they can turn out in a day, two or three 
hundred thousand loaves of bread in one 
day, all done without, almost, human hands 
touching it, done in a building that is kept 
at constant temperature, constant humidity. 
They’ve created a climate for it. The bakery 
oven is completely controlled, foot by foot, 
almost, of its length, that its temperature 
is right. And the temperature is less when 
they’re coming back in the top of the oven, or 
more; I don’t know which. The temperature’s 
different coming back in the top of the oven 
than it is in the bottom of the oven. 

So there are a lot of angles to this, and 
these people in Texas are in control of every 
step in the design and in the construction of 
this bakery. If the market changes materially 
in some way, even in building materials, you 
may change your building material a bit. 
We used concrete tilt-up for this bakery in 
Oakland, and we covered it with pebbles like 
the high school, the Wooster High School, so 
it’d look a little better. 

In addition to the bakery itself, you have 
two rather large buildings for the washing and 
sterilizing of trucks. Your truck goes in and 
it’s steamed at high pressure with compressed 
air—everything you can think of done to that 
truck. They have a paint shop; they keep them 
painted. And then they have a rather large 
repair shop because they have two hundred 
and fifty—or did have—two hundred and fifty 
of these big bakery trucks besides all of their 
other rolling stock, automobiles and that sort 
of thing. You can see the amount of money 
that’s involved and the tremendous scope 


of the operation, the variety of things that 
must be done, done by experts and done on 
schedule. I thought that was (one of] the most 
interesting jobs I’ve had. Of course, Coca Cola 
was another very interesting job, but that was 
a rather small deal compared to the bakery. 

These are some of the things that make 
architecture so interesting in a small town. 
In the big cities, architects almost have to 
specialize in some line of work, and they 
become experts in the operation and in 
the financing and the marketing and the 
materials, and everything you can think of, 
and they also have a big enough volume of 
that work to keep their offices busy. Some 
of the big offices have several departments 
expert in various things that come up in their 
area. But the architect in a small town has a 
chance to get into almost everything that is 
done in his town, one way or another—most 
interesting. 




10 


Nevada State Board 
of Architecture 


Well, 1947, the legislature decided that 
architects and engineers should be registered. 
I don’t know whether the engineers started 
then or not. But anyhow, right in that area of 
time, both of these registration boards were 
set up, and I became the chairman of the first 
registration board. And as such, my license 
was issued as No. 1 in the state of Nevada, 
first man to be licensed. The other people on 
the board, five of them, got [No.] 2, 3, 4, and 
5, and my partner got 6 [laughing]. 

We had a man named Perkins from 
Oklahoma, who was at that time the secretary 
of the NCARB: this was just shortly after it 
was organized. He had a very small office 
in his home, and he didn’t have too much 
money, hut when any state wanted to find 
out about NCARB and to license its board 
members [he administered the tests]. We 
took our examinations at that time, when 
he was in Tonopah (we did this in Tonopah, 
Nevada), and we took our examinations and 
we were all licensed. When I say we took our 
examinations and were licensed, why, this was 
a pretty sketchy little of deal. We didn’t submit 


anybody’s recommendations or anything else. 
We just said, “Yeah, we’re architects, and this 
is a building I built. You can see for yourself 
I’m good,” and Perkins says, “Of course, you 
are, and you’re licensed” [laughing]. 

It’s not licensed, by the way; it’s registered. 
Licensing and registration are different. In 
Nevada, we are registered by the state as 
architects and permitted to practice anyplace. 
But if we practice in Rena, we have to take out 
a business license. And Rena just bears down 
on this business. They want a percentage of 
your total cost of buildings. And that’s the way 
we get paid, only six percent, seven percent, 
eight percent, maybe. And if Rena suddenly 
wants a half percent, why, they’ve taken fifteen 
or twenty percent of our income. So that got 
to be a little bit onerous for a while. That’s the 
difference between licensing and registration. 

Well, we began our operations, and 
architects gradually realized that they had to 
be licensed in the state of Nevada. Architects 
were doing work in Las Vegas, just walk in 
and do the job. Most of the jobs that were 
done in Las Vegas originated someplace else, 



98 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


mostly in Los Angeles and in Glendale at 
lower southern California. Those architects 
all moved in, and they [were] working very 
happily without a license. Utah was coming 
into Elko, Utah architects, unlicensed. 
All over the eastern side of Nevada, Utah 
architects were doing the work. 

So we had quite a little chore to get the 
architects to understand that if they did work 
in the state of Nevada, they were going to be 
arrested. This became a misdemeanor. And 
gradually, it became known that Nevada, 
as with the rest of the states who—, At the 
same time, I might say, most of the Western 
states were beginning to require registration, 
rather strictly require registration, look into 
each job that vent and allowed no one to do 
work without registration. It had been pretty 
sketchy before. If nobody complained, why, 
you came in and did the work and left the 
state. So we began, then, to get a great many 
architects coming into the state. Id say that it’s 
five to one architects outside the state register 
to do business in Nevada against Nevada 
architects themselves. 

So as I say, we began to get so many of 
these architects coming in, and they came 
in with all sorts of stories and all sorts of 
submissions that they were competent, and 
as I told you a minute ago, the other states 
were just beginning to pick this up, outside of 
California. California had a good registration 
board. And the material that came in was 
pretty sketchy. And we were looking down 
each architect’s throat, which was a big job! 

We had [Frank] Lloyd Wright’s brother 
come in for a license. He was working in 
southern California, and he brought a big roll 
of drawings under his arm. He brought in the 
darnedest bunch of stuff, and he said that he 
had been trained by Frank Lloyd Wright in 
his place that—I never can think of the name 
of that place, in Arizona. And we refused him 


a license. He didn’t have the qualifications we 
required, and he was going to sue us and just 
raise Cain. But he went back to Los Angeles, 
and I don’t know what he did. I think he went 
to school for a little while. Anyhow, he got 
some credentials that were semi-acceptable. 
And we were taking semi-acceptance at that 
time because we didn’t even have an attorney 
working for the board. 

Rut as these registrations increased in 
number, we began to get some money. And 
with the money, then, we were able to hire 
an attorney, a board attorney, and to have 
separate audits of our receipts each year by 
our own private auditor, not by the state. 
And then, all of a sudden, the state decided 
you had to have budgets. So suddenly, it was 
necessary that in order to operate, we had to 
have a budget. Well, we made out a budget, 
and the result of that was that we included 
quite a bit of money that we didn’t spend, 
because we didn’t know— for instance, I 
wouldn’t know whether our next meeting 
was going to be in Hawaii and we were going 
to send five members of the board to Hawaii 
and back, and pay all their expenses. Well, this 
could be something between $2,- and $3,000 
of expense that might or might not happen, 
depending. If the next meeting was held in 
San Francisco, it’d be nothing. The fellows 
from Las Vegas wouldn’t want to go, and the 
three of us from up here would probably go. 
So, there was quite a bit of leeway required in 
making these early budgets. But the trouble 
with it was that the money we didn’t spend 
went back into the general fund of the state 
of Nevada. 

Well, we got a law passed, then, that 
our money that we took went into our own 
account in the state treasurer’s office and was 
available for our use when we needed it. So 
when our records began to get so bulky (and 
an architect’s record is a bulky folder), and the 



Nevada State Board of Architecture 


99 


storage of that material—. We have no right to 
throw it away, and it just gets to be too much. 
So we had to hire microfilming, and we had 
to take care of these records until we could 
get them microfilmed. And also, we made 
each architect who had not been licensed to 
an earthquake construction examination, 
he had to write a treatise about earthquake 
construction which would run fifty or sixty 
pages, which is another tremendous mass of 
material to store. 

So we began to microfilm all of our stuff. 
And in so doing, we took the bulky material 
and stored it dead storage in some warehouse 
someplace. This has been very successful. I 
think we’ll be allowed to throw away a great 
deal of this material. Certainly, “e can do it 
when an architect dies, but we should be able 
to do it, we’ll say, after ten years or five years, 
some reasonable time. We should be able to 
just keep the microfilm record. 

Then we had to have a secretary, the 
thing was so great. We had to have a regular 
secretary, and as I say, as the thing grew, we 
had enough money to hire a secretary, and 
as the result is today, we have a secretary 
whose work is marginal. We have someone 
that does the microfilming for her, and all 
she has to do is have a little can about so big 
around [gesture] and know what’s in it. She 
gets $6,000 a year. And we have an attorney 
who gets a retainer plus the cost of any work 
he has to do. And we’re able to finance these 
things, and we haven’t touched our money 
with the state. As a matter of fact, our surplus 
is growing a little bit all the time. 

So we’re able to do an acceptable job on 
an architect who comes in now. We’ll take 
an architect who has, from NCARB, a blue 
cover report which says that he has taken an 
examination comparable to the examination 
required by the state of Nevada, and that these 
are the marks he made in the various subjects, 


and that he has been recommended by the 
following people. Those recommendations 
have been checked to see that those people did 
say those things and that they did mean them. 
And we frequently find that some architect 
that’s made a very nice recommendation is 
some guy that says, Well, I couldn’t write 
down exactly what I think, but I don’t go that 
far. Actually—” [laughing]. So they check 
those recommendations. 

And this man has a blue cover, which says 
that he has really taken [the] examination. All 
right, we’ll say he takes the state of California’s 
examination, which requires him to take an 
examination in the engineering of earthquake 
resistant construction. He has complied with 
everything the state of Nevada needs, except 
with one thing: the law says the man must have 
his fingerprints taken by [the] FBI, he must 
have a picture of himself submitted with his 
application and those fingerprints, and then 
he must appear before the board in person 
so the board says, “This is the man whose 
application has been submitted,” because we 
have had instances of a man who submitted 
the qualifications of another architect and 
examination material (which was in collusion 
with the other architect, by the way) and 
was trying to get licensed on that basis. But 
with the pictures and the fingerprints, the 
fact that he must appear before us, we pretty 
nearly killed that possibility of a man getting 
a license with somebody else’s qualifications. 

And we also have a requirement for a 
personal interview, both before and after an 
examination, t think we’re going to cut out 
some of these interviews. The bunch of fellows 
trying to interview some young architect, they 
ask some pretty silly questions. Anyhow, this 
youngster comes, and we decide from what 
he tells, and generally, from his attitude. You’d 
be surprised how much attitude, how much 
personality is involved with the decision to 



100 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


give an architect an examination, a young 
architect. Some of them are so scatterbrained, 
they are so social-society oriented that we don’t 
think they’re ready to take an examination 
and enter a profession where they just might 
be a disturbing factor. And once in a great 
while, some youngster who comes for an 
examination is told, “Well, we don’t think 
you’re ready yet. You go back and get more 
schooling,” or, “You go back and get more 
experience, and then we’ll give you another 
hearing,” because it costs money to examine 
them. It takes time to examine them, and it is 
very discouraging to have an examination in 
which a very low, low percentage of men pass 
it. And if you get a lot of unprepared people, 
your percentage of passing goes way down, 
and the complaints that begin to come in are 
that your examination is unfair, that you’re 
keeping people from practicing in your town. 
So it has its beneficial aspects, really. 

And then the interview after the 
examination simply checks up on what 
the man thought of the examination. This 
is valuable to us in preparing another 
examination. There are very valid criticisms 
come up from time to time. And I’ll tell you 
one. 

Well, this twelve Western states, when 
they write examinations, they knew I was 
an engineer. My license as an engineer is 
No. 31. I was one of the early registered 
engineers, structural engineers, in the state 
of Nevada. And I picked a job out of our 
office. And I thought, “Now, here is a job 
which we have done. It’s a logical thing to 
use for an examination.” Well, logical, my 
foot! It was a very complicated earthquake 
resistant construction with columns flopping 
around in the breeze, and overhangs, and 
what have you, and it required the services, 
really, of a trained engineer in order to figure 
it. Well, I had figured it, and I didn’t think 


I was a trained engineer. I was just another 
hack engineer. So I wrote the examination, 
and I wrote it from my figures on this thing 
[laughing]. And nobody passed it! Nobody 
in twelve states. No applicant passed that 
examination, and in twelve states, about half 
of the applicants read it and walked out! 

Well, you can see where Ferris lit. He lit 
right in the middle of a meeting. And, “What 
the hell is the matter with you? These are 
kids!” I don’t know how I got so far off base) 
I had done that easily, and I did not specialize 
in structural engineering. I’m not a specialist 
in structural engineering. And I thought, “If 
I can do it, I guess most any man who’s had 
college training in engineering (which they 
get with an architectural course, although it’s a 
little sketchy) should be able to do it. So that’s 
the last time that I wrote a tough examination! 

Now, this points out the fact that in 
examining large numbers of young men 
for a professional- registration—and I don’t 
care whether this is the law or medicine or 
architecture, or what it maybe—it is necessary 
that the examination be fairly representative of 
the abilities of the groups of people, groups of 
people who make application for registration, 
that we must consider what the universities 
give them. And this is a function and a very 
important matter in research that we are 
conducting now in NCARB (the NCARB is 
conducting it), as to what the universities are 
giving to the students as compared to what, 
as of today, in a state of change, they should 
be giving to the students, with the idea that 
this can then be put [to use). The American 
Institute of Architects has a committee 
on education which is interested in all the 
universities who are giving architectural 
courses and in the material that they give out 
and the character of the construction, and 
all that sort of thing, and they work rather 
closely with universities to discuss these 



Nevada State Board of Architecture 


101 


things, to say, “Look. It looks to us like you’re 
haywire, that we need improvement or we 
need something or other” And it’s not that the 
architects are saying, “you must do this to the 
educators,” it’s that they’re saying, “This isn’t 
working too well from our standpoint. What 
can we do’” 

So that is going along at this particular 
time, and the attitude for examinations for 
architects is coming more and more to the 
point that multiple choice examinations 
can indicate the level of qualifications of an 
applicant, and that they can be positively 
marked, that there can be no difference in 
approach to the grading of an examination 
because a man in Nevada has one attitude 
toward the examination and a man in New 
York has another attitude, and he thinks, 
“Well, he shouldn’t have to know that. He 
did pretty well. Well, I’ll give him a ten,” and 
this man says, “He ought to know that. He 
gets a zero. 

With multiple choice—and these multiple 
choice examinations are made up by a firm 
who specializes in trying to analyze the 
qualifications of people or projects, anything, 
as far as that goes, with multiple choice 
questions. And they have prepared three of 
our seven examinations now with multiple 
choice, and they’ve been working very well. 
The idea is that this organization will set up, 
we’ll say, a group of, let’s say, six hundred 
questions. Maybe it’d be more, not less than 
six hundred, I know. And so we as a board get 
those six hundred questions, and we select 
two hundred questions out of the six hundred 
for our examination this year. We can select 
a different two hundred the next year and 
another two hundred the next year, and the 
fourth year nobody remembers the first two 
hundred, so this works out all right. You have 
a backlog of questions which will serve you 
for years. But, of course, you add to those 


questions as the changes in the profession 
occur. And it looks as though some different 
qualifications should be inspected. 

Well, we’ll say we take two hundred 
questions. And we figure that of those two 
hundred questions, an architect should 
have a familiarity with a hundred and fifty 
of them, that a man from Pennsylvania and 
a man from Stanford might have different 
elements in their education, different levels 
of response, and it’s not necessarily true 
that one man should know every one of 
those questions. So we’ll say we think that 
of those questions, it’s reasonable that a 
man should be able to pick a hundred and 
fifty of them which he might say he had 
some familiarity. Then he has four choices. 
And of those four choices, he can guess; or 
knowing something about it, he can take a 
pick from a small amount of information; or 
knowing the answer, he can pick the right 
one. And that in a hundred and fifty of the 
two hundred questions, we’re almost bound 
to get a reasonable idea as to this man’s 
qualifications— the ones he guesses, and all 
the rest of it. 

And then this examination goes back to 
the company who made it, and they check 
it and grade it. Then it comes back to us. If 
seventy-five is passing and they come back 
with a grade of seventy-two, we will then go 
through that examination and make up our 
own minds. If it comes back with a grade of 
twenty, we will just take a look at it and set 
it to one side. If it comes back with a grade 
of eighty-nine, we may take another look 
at it to see if it’s that good. But in general, 
all borderline marks are checked. Because 
we are the only authority that can issue a 
registration in the state of Nevada. I don’t care 
how many people work on it with NCARB 
or the multiple question people, if we say 
no, that’s it. And if we say yes, that’s it. And 



102 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


we’re supposed to say those things with some 
degree of knowledge about the man. 

So as of today, we have an architectural 
board who are members of the Western 
Association of Architectural Registration 
Boards and who have been using their 
examination. But we are considering the— 
well, we’re going to cut out this Western 
Association altogether ultimately, before too 
long, and take NCARB’s examinations and 
give them. And then a man who passes that 
has an NCARB registration such that he can 
send it to any state that accepts NCARB and 
say, “Here are my NCARB qualifications.” And 
NCARB will pull his package and send a copy 
to that board. And he’s an architect in a very 
short time. As I say, it’s coming to the point 
now where NCARB has reorganized to the 
point where they are acceptable in most all 
of the states. And registration between states 
and ultimately between foreign countries is 
going to be expedited greatly because of this. 
And the reason that we organized the Western 
states was because NCARB was not working 
satisfactorily. So if it works satisfactorily, it 
will be a duplicate activity, and of no use, 
particularly. So it will probably phase out. 

So that’s our present standing. We have 
enough money to have an adequate secretary. 
We have policed our form of application. 
Now, you can have a form of application 
which is very sketchy, you can have a form 
for application which is unusually bulky, 
needlessly bulky, as a matter of fact, or you 
can have one that is extracting from the 
architect that fills it out a pretty reasonable 
idea of what he has done and what he has in 
the way of qualifications so that you can say, 
“He may take the examination,” or you could 
say, “He may appear for an interview to be 
examined by reciprocity.” And this is where 
the great number of architects are registered 
in the state of Nevada, is by reciprocity. Now, 


at each one of our meetings, we have two 
members in Las Vegas and we have three 
members here. We have set up a rule, which 
we have a right to do by law, that men from 
Los Angeles and in that area, the Southern 
states (Arizona, and so forth), who wish to be 
examined by reciprocity at a meeting of our 
board, they may come to Las Vegas, and they 
may appear before the two men in Las Vegas 
for their examination, and the results may be 
sent to us in the north. And if we think they’re 
adequate (which we always do), this man 
can receive his registration without waiting 
for a yearly meeting of the entire board. And 
we do that in the north. The three of us hold 
meetings sometimes twice a month so that 
architects who have jobs in the state or who 
expect to hold jobs in the state can appear 
and be registered rapidly. And usually, a man 
who is completely qualified, an interview of 
five minutes is all that he gets, and he gets that 
because the state law requires him to sit down 
in a room with us. But it’s working very nicely 
now, and you can see that it did come out of 
a pretty confused setup twenty-five years ago. 

Now do we get along as a group on a 
unified project?] Well, I don’t think that the 
fact that we are competitors has much bearing 
on our work as a board. We all come there 
with the idea of doing something about our 
profession, which is a common thing, and in 
which we do not have competition as such. 
We may be better professional men than 
others, and that sort of thing, but there’s not 
a competition in it. And the result is that as 
our board considers the various problems put 
before us, and those are legal, they sometimes 
have to do with personalities, they have to do 
with the qualifications of a man, the technical 
qualifications of a man for his job. And in 
most of our cases, as I have said before, 
these are men who have been registered in 
other states. We have the report from those 



Nevada State Board of Architecture 


103 


other states on these men. And the only 
reason we’re calling them in is because we 
are required to see them and compare them 
with their photograph and their fingerprints, 
to make sure that they are the man who took 
the examination in Podunk and he has now 
qualified himself as an architect in any place 
comparable with Podunk. So I don’t think 
we have any problem working together. And 
as I say, a large part of our work is done by 
holding meetings in both Las Vegas and Reno 
with portions of the board. A board meeting 
in Las Vegas, handled by only two men of the 
five on the board, they reach their conclusions 
and send us the minutes for approval. And if 
there is any question, of course, this will be 
withheld, held up. 

!Te just recently, by the way, had quite a 
shock when the FBI decided that they would 
give no more fingerprint service to anyone 
but government jobs and federal law required 
jobs. And this morning, the reaction to that 
was so severe that this morning’s paper says 
that they have reconsidered. And, of course, 
in our state, the gambling industry feels that 
it would very shortly be put out of business if 
they couldn’t have a check on the employees 
because this would be, certainly, a green 
pasture for all the crooks in the world. They 
could just come in and flash their personality 
and a few lies about their background and get 
in and steal ’em blind! So we’re very happy that 
that fingerprint service has been reinstated. 

We have never called anyone back. We 
have never taken a license from anyone. We 
had one hearing. A firm of architects here 
in Reno had a failure of some scaffolding, 
or some shoring, really, and the floor fell 
down in this. It’s a four-story motel over on 
Lake Street. (It was purple [laughing] when 
they put it up!) The owner of this facility 
appeared before the board to ask us to take 
the state registration away from this firm. So 


we held a hearing, which we were supposed 
to do, and brought these two kids (they were 
really kids—well, what am I talking about? 
They were about, I suppose, thirty, between 
twenty-five and thirty). They made a very 
excellent, controlled, calm presentation of 
their side of that controversy. And when it 
was over, it appeared that this was a revenge 
sort of a motive on the part of the owner, 
that this had happened. It had cost him quite 
a lot of money, and I think the architectural 
firm had to put up some of that them selves. 
But he wanted to get even. Now, these two 
kids had hired a registered engineer in the 
state of Nevada, an engineer who had been 
the structural engineer for the state planning 
board before they hired him. So as far as they 
knew, he had a background of education 
and experience, and was entirely suitable 
as an engineer for a little bit of a four-story 
job. And he was the man, in his inspections, 
who failed to catch what was wrong. Now, as 
far as the owner’s concerned, of course, his 
contract’s with the architect. If the architect 
hires someone who’s not competent, then it’s 
still the architect’s baby. But here, we have two 
kids who hired someone who we might have 
thought was competent, as far as that goes. 
And the construction was adequate. It was 
a flaw in a manufactured article shipped in 
and used that had caused this failure. It was a 
portion of the floor, not the whole floor. 

So we did not even censure these two 
boys. We congratulated them on how they had 
kept their cool, as they say nowadays, and how 
they had presented their case with reason, and 
we just dismissed the whole thing. This is the 
only time that we have held a hearing on an 
architect to discontinue his license. 

We have had hearings with people 
who have come to this country, let’s say 
from—well, one from Yugoslavia. And we 
had one from Czechoslovakia. They wanted 



104 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


to be licensed in the state of Nevada; they 
had moved to the United States. We had to 
try and find out what kind of school they 
had graduated from, what was its rating. 
The California Registration Board have 
a department based in Los Angeles with 
people who are supposedly familiar with the 
credibility of schools throughout the world 
and their standing as teachers for architects. 
It’s only—we’re only interested in architecture. 
And we got in touch with them, and they 
didn’t have any dope on this. These are called 
technical institutes, not universities, and that 
sort of thing. It’s pretty hard to tell how good 
they are, and some of them evidently are very 
good, and very hard to get into, and they make 
you work like a dog to get out. So we have that 
sort of thing coming up. 

And then once in a while we have a 
man who is obviously pretty callow. He 
just hasn’t developed. He wants to become 
an architect and we feel that if we licensed 
him or we granted him a registration and he 
began to practice in this state that his work 
would be a severe criticism of the profession 
of architecture and would affect the other 
practitioners in the state, the legitimate people 
who are architects. 

But in general, our board has been a 
pleasant, functioning group. Mid we now 
have gone to microfilm for the storage of all 
records, and we have a sufficient amount of 
money. We sent the entire board to Hawaii 
for one of the meetings (this happened to be a 
crucial meeting). I have been to Cleveland and 
to Boston and to Miami, to Hawaii, and, oh, in 
Portland, San Francisco, and Los Angeles to 
meetings with expenses from the state board 
of architecture. We’ve had that kind of money. 

I was going to Boston this year, but I’m 
getting a little bit tired of going, and I’m 
also beginning to feel that these architects 
are a bunch of babies. I was one of them, 


and I suppose I was a baby, too. But their 
continuous argument and talk about a subject 
that has seemingly been sanctioned by the 
entire group and is ready for vote, and then, 
“Now, there’s one more thing—, and they get 
up to a microphone and go through about 
a five-minute talk, and then, just as we’re 
ready to take a vote, somebody gets up and 
says, “Now, I have to say that my board does 
not favor this and will not use it if you pass 
it.” And then comes, “Well, if one board isn’t 
going to use it, maybe we should wait ’til they 
get set so they can use it,” and on and on and 
on. So I don’t have that kind of time any more 
[laughing]. 

But as far as the Nevada state board is 
concerned, it’s been a pleasant experience, and 
I think that it is functioning very well. It, as 
I have told you, is a member of the Western 
States Board of Architectural Examiners—but 
it’s not a board; it’s an association of the boards 
of the Western states. And it is also a member 
of the National council of Architectural 
Registration Boards. 

Its function is only in the matter of 
registering a man in order that he may engage 
in architecture work, and we require that he 
do that before he does any work of any kind in 
the state of Nevada. However, he can make the 
complete plans for a building in the state of 
Nevada in his office in California. And then, 
if he comes up and gets a license—or gets a 
registration (I keep mixing those two up, and 
you shouldn’t), he can use that material. And 
if he happens to be a member of a firm, and he 
is the only member of the firm who is licensed 
in Nevada, then he may say that, “This is such 
and such a project, and da te da te da, and so 
forth, Architects, AIA,” and then he signs his 
name, “Architect,’ and he puts his seal— he’s 
required to have a seal, and we use a stamp 
instead of a seal now, because a stamp prints 
on the paper, blueprints, and the seal won’t. 



Nevada State Board of Architecture 


105 


So he puts his seal on the drawings, and he 
is the one responsible person, as far as the 
board is concerned. Nobody else in his firm 
is recognized at all. He is responsible also for 
his consultants. Now, if he should have an 
architectural firm consult for him, a specialist 
firm in some part of his project, he would 
still be responsible for the other architectural 
firm’s work. 

So those are some of the things that the 
board functions in. And I think that we have 
done a reasonably good job, and we have good 
communication now with the states. We’ve got 
quite a lot of correspondence with Oklahoma, 
for instance, with respect to a man who had 
taken the examination in Oklahoma for an 
architect’s license, and they passed him. And 
we’ve got copies of the examination, and they 
passed him with marks of seventy and sixty- 
nine, too, Which we do not recognize. So we 
refused this man a license. He has become 
licensed in the state of Utah now, on the basis 
of his Oklahoma examination. But he still 
has no license in the state of Nevada, and he 
has tried to get attorneys to sue our board, 
and the attorneys have (two of them that I 
know of) told him that our board is within its 
rights. So he says we pick on him. And I don’t 
know—maybe we are because I want to tell 
you that some of the members of the board 
are real irritated with this guy. And he is not 
very much restrained in his language about 
the board, either [laughing]. 




11 

Activities with 
Professional Organizations 


Previous to the Cleveland convention 
[of the NCARB], there had been a great 
deal of dissatisfaction with the operations 
of the National Council for Architectural 
Registration Boards. 

This organization is dedicated to the 
proposition that since architects are becoming 
more and more mobile, are finding their jobs 
further and further away from home, and 
even in foreign countries, that the necessity 
for quick registration in other jurisdictions 
becomes more and more marked. And the 
organization, NCARB, was founded in order 
to make it easy for an architect to go from one 
state to another state and say to the authorities 
in the second state, 1 am registered in my 
home state by examination.” He tells them 
what he went through to be registered, and if, 
then, that was comparable to the requirements 
for the second state, they could say, “Well, 
okay, you don’t need to come six months from 
now and take an examination, “we’ll give you 
a registration now and you can go to work in 
our state on your job immediately.” 


Well, the NCARB, then, was expected to 
take the data on the architect in the first state 
and put it in their files, and we’ll say they 
approved it as being representative of the 
requirements for these states, that it wasn’t 
some state in which you could just go as a 
friend and become registered, but you had 
actually taken examinations comparable to 
those of any other state. SO they began to set 
up examinations which would be acceptable 
to the fifty states. And then when you made 
your application to NCARB, they might even 
examine you, give you a four-day examination. 
Or they might be able to say, “you took a 
four-day examination in California, and you 
passed it, and that is sufficient evidence for 
us. So give us your record.” And they compile 
the record of your education and the record of 
jobs you have done to date, the record of your 
pre-registration experience, and then they 
also held a meeting face to face. And if they 
thought that you were a pleasing gentleman 
who would be a [laughing] credit to the 
profession, naturally, there was no question. 



108 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


But if they found out you were a distinctively 
bad personality, and that in your record there 
was evidence that this personality had been 
a deterrent to you, they might say, “Well, we 
will not register you. 

In Nevada, for instance, before an architect 
can be registered, we take his fingerprints and 
send them to the FBI. And youd be surprised 
how many architects have been arrested for 
one thing and another. Architects have been 
arrested for drunk and disorderly, for stealing 
a gun from the United States when they came 
out of service—you know. The funniest little 
things come up that aren’t really significant. 
But anybody who has a real criminal record, 
that’s right on his FBI report, and he doesn’t 
get registered. And we don’t have to say, “”Te 
don’t think you’re fit,” because we can be sued 
for almost opening our mouths to one of these 
youngsters. 

Well, this was the purpose of NCARB. 
Their charges for their services were pretty 
reasonable. And as those services increased, 
almost by leaps and bounds, as the trend 
developed for a large company or a large 
financial institution in New York City or in 
San Francisco or Los Angeles to discuss with 
some prospective builder the financial part of 
his transaction, it became almost necessary 
that this owner have an architect with him 
to give him some advice in discussing the 
matter with the financial people who had 
construction people in their staff. And they 
want to know what you know about building 
a building before they give you some money. 

So here comes a big project. Usually 
these projects that are started in the big 
financial centers are big projects, and they 
need competent practitioners, professional 
men. And they need them at the discussions 
where they’re trying to figure out whether 
that money’s going to be available or not. So 
here is a local architect in a big city who is in 


on the project. And the project, we’ll say, is in 
Pakistan. So when the money has finally been 
allotted and the other details have been settled 
and they have decided to go ahead with this 
project, what’s more logical than the architect 
who is familiar with the entire project to date 
should become the designer for the building, 
or whatever it may be? 

So he needs, then, to be accepted in 
Pakistan by the authorities as a competent 
architect. And if, through NCARB, he can 
have the documents that are required, 
showing his education and his experience, 
and so forth, with the recommendations of 
people who have known him and his work 
(and there are three of those that are required, 
also), and a report on his appearance for a 
personal interview which is acceptable, all 
those documents and any other documents 
required by Pakistan or Nevada (or any other 
jurisdiction, is what I’m talking about) are 
forwarded from NCARB, which is located 
in Washington. And if they are found 
satisfactory, this man receives notification, 
either come or send the money, do whatever’s 
necessary to get registered, and go to work. 

Well, they got so many of these requests 
for registration with NCARB that they didn’t 
have the personnel or the money to handle 
them, with the result that we began to get 
reports from architects. 

Our law, by the way, has a clause that you 
must be registered with NCARB. The reason 
for this is that NCARB, supposedly, had the 
personnel, the experience, and the routine to 
examine architects thoroughly and to say to 
us, “The architect is qualified for work in your 
state.” So our law requires that an architect 
who is registered by us must have an NCARB 
license. 

Well, it was taking two and three years to 
get a license. And some men, after six months, 
just quit trying. The result was that we had 



Activities with Professional Organizations 


109 


to say, “Well, you are evidently a licensed 
architect in California by examinations, 
completely acceptable to us. And this kink in 
our law, which is for protection against certain 
types of applicants, does not apply to you. So 
you make your application f or registration 
with NCARB, and keep us advised with copies 
of your correspondence and the progress that 
you’re making, and we’ll register you now. But 
we expect you to keep on this if it takes ten 
years to get your license, just so long as you 
are continually trying to do it.” 

This was not satisfactory, with the result 
that [Elmo] Bruner of Las Vegas was appointed 
as chairman of a committee to look into this 
situation and see what could be done to speed 
up the operation of NCARB to the point 
where it could be useful and satisfactory to 
the architectural profession, to actually fulfill 
its purpose. And Bruner had a heart attack. 
And Bruner said, “Would you please do this 
for me?” 

So I became the man to look into this 
situation and to make a report. And I had 
a committee of—I think a committee of six 
architects. I remember one of these architects 
in Maine simply wrote back when I asked him 
for his opinions and for his suggestions that 
he was retiring and he wanted no part of it. 
But in general, that was the attitude of all the 
architects. They wanted no part of this because 
they all had registrations with NCARB. And 
they didn’t want to get into any trouble. 

Well, [laughing] out here in Nevada in our 
little state, I couldn’t get into much trouble 
anyhow (and I never have worried much 
about getting into a little trouble), so I took 
this thing on. And the more I looked into it, 
the more awful it seemed that they should 
be operating an office so inefficiently and so 
completely without result. If you were a friend 
of one of the people there, you could probably 
get someplace. 


So, the more I dug into this, the more it 
seemed to me it needed some “surgery. And 
the result was I made out a report which 
simply condemned the whole organization as 
presently in operation, and very particularly, 
the man who was the secretary-manager of 
the operation. He was a simple little guy. 

Well, also, since this was exactly what I 
said, surgery, I didn’t want to throw a monkey 
wrench into the operation to the point 
where it faded away. The board of directors, 
particularly with this little architect named 
Clarence Joseph Paderewski of San Diego, 
were real nice people, good businessmen, and 
they were dissatisfied, also. But they didn’t 
want to put up a lot of personal money to 
make a change, and they didn’t want to hurt 
this guy’s feelings and that guy’s feelings, 
and the thing was at a standstill, as far as any 
change was concerned, So I asked Paderewski, 
who was the president at the time, if he would 
call a session of the board of directors and 
let me read my report, and that if there was 
something in it which could be changed to 
advantage, this would be the thoughtful and 
nice thing to do, that I did not want to disrupt 
things, but I wanted to constructively criticize. 
And he said he’d just be glad to do that, and 
they had a meeting. 

And I came in, and I read the report. I had 
to tell them that this was my report, that the 
committee had refused to answer letters or to 
become involved in this thing in any way, and 
therefore, that in making this report, I did not 
make it as the result of committee, but since 
the committee seemed loathe to function, that 
it was my own reaction. 

And they said, “This is fine. We know 
what you were up against. We’ve talked about 
it before.” 

So I read the report to them, and the guy 
that I wanted fired—and this is just the way 
I put it—they ought to get rid of him, that he 



110 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


wasn’t suitable. Well, it developed that he had 
come to realize he wasn’t suitable, and he was 
thinking in terms of another type of activity 
for himself at the time. So his feelings were 
not massacred, anyhow [laughing]. They were 
perhaps massaged a little. 

And they said, “Well, go ahead with your 
report. We want something to happen. We 
don’t know how to go about it or what to do. 
But we need an action by the entire body of 
the fifty states, some sort of recommendation 
that can be voted on with something like 
unanimity before we start.” 

So I started to make this report from a 
field microphone down in the audience. And 
they immediately stopped me, said, “Get up 
on the platform there.” The better public 
address system came from the platform, see. 
So I got up on the platform. And I read this 
report. And then, after having read exactly 
what I wanted to say, I took about fifteen 
minutes to tell them first that this was an 
individual report, that I had not had the 
cooperation of my committee, and told them 
what study I had made, where I had gotten 
my material and my ideas. And then I laid 
on the line unofficially and off the record 
what I thought about this whole thing. I 
said, “I think that the report which is going 
into your annual report in print should be 
as I have said it because we do not want to 
permanently hurt anybody professionally. 
We don’t want to make anyone want to leave 
our organization because we have gotten out 
of line, but I do want you to know what, after 
a pretty thorough examination of the facts, I 
think,” and I laid it on the line. I’ve forgotten 
what I said. I couldn’t tell you what I said. I just 
know what I said was, “It stinks I” [laughing] 

And when I got through, there was a great 
deal of applause. And a number of them came 
up to congratulate me on the report and to say 
also that, “This is the first time we’ve had a 


committee chairman that we could really hear 
every word he [laughing] said,” [laughing] 
because I got a little hot. 

Well, the result was that this meeting 
voted that NCARB reconsider its setup, 
that they secure not only a substitute for the 
secretary-manager, but they secure an office 
manager who understands putting through 
large amounts of paper work and filing large 
amounts of paper work, and that if the money 
wasn’t available that they raise their dues, and 
that they raise their examination fee, and that 
they go out and borrow some money id its 
necessary, and get this thing on the road. 

And this was voted unanimously, with 
a lot of applause and so forth: “We like this 
NCARB idea, but we want it to work. So do 
what has been suggested.” And the result was 
that they did. So this man redesigned and had 
got a job. He wasn’t hurt. And he probably got 
something more suitable to his qualifications. 

They put in an office manager, pretty 
sharp young fellow. As a matter of fact, before 
they went through, they had either two or 
three. The last one is the man who found his 
niche and is still there. And they got rid of 
this secretary-manager and got another one. 
And they got rid of some of their help who 
had become used to these lackadaisical ways 
that they weren’t even paying any attention 
to where they filed stuff. You couldn’t find it. 
And when we went through the records, and 
in the two years they cleaned up a backlog of 
7,000 applications from all over the world, 
either rejected them, or they did something 
with them, and they got them out of those 
files. Today, if you are qualified and you 
have gone through the proper routine to 
satisfy the requirements of the NCARB, in 
approximately two weeks you can get your 
registration, and that means that you can 
go all over the United States. Several foreign 
countries now will accept NCARB. 



Activities with Professional Organizations 


111 


Another facet of this matter was previous 
to the meeting in Cleveland, this same Bruner 
and I, in talking this matter over, decided that 
we should do something in our area to make 
registration between states easier and faster, 
with the result that first, we went to Lake 
Tahoe to meet with the California registration 
board. They examine some eight hundred 
applicants per year to become architects. And 
we said to them, “Look. You have to write 
these examinations. You have an organization 
in Los Angeles which rates architectural 
schools in foreign countries, so that if a man 
from a foreign country comes and says, ‘I 
am a graduate of something in Poland,’ we 
can find out of it’s acceptable here. And you 
have people who correct these examination 
papers for you. 

Of course, the board finally has to take all 
examination papers and give their official—. 
But what they do is to throw out all those 
what’ve only got twenty and thirty [percent). 
And, really, all they correct are those that are 
on the border, which may have been given 
a registration or denied a registration. And 
they check that and see what they want to do 
about it. And we thought, “Well, here is all 
this going on right next door. Why don’t we 
ask them if they’ll let us use their examination 
(which then makes reciprocity between us 
easy), and let them correct our papers for a 
fee which will be much cheaper than we can 
do it, much faster than we can do it. Because 
a man who takes the examination and waits 
six months to find out whether he passed it 
or not is not a friend of the board. 

So they said this sounded real good. And 
we made a deal, that they would give us their 
examination, we’d give it here exactly the same 
time that they gave it in California, and that 
they would then have their people correct 
our papers and send them back to us, and we 
could go over them and do what we wanted 


to with them. Well, the state of Washington 
heard about this. And they came down to 
meet with the California board and said they’d 
like to get into it. And then California said, 
“Look, here’s Nevada and Washington want 
to get into this thing. It looks like it’s going to 
work. What can we do with it?” 

Well, Bruner and I had been thinking in 
terms of twelve Western states. So we said, 
“Well, why don’t we get an opinion from the 
Western states here where architects are busy 
crossing state lines all around and see what 
we can come up with?” And we came up 
with enthusiastic acceptance of the idea, so 
that we organized the Western Association 
of Architectural Registration Boards. And we 
proceeded to write an examination which was 
given by all—I think eleven states or ten states 
joined; I’ve forgotten. I don’t think Utah came 
with us at that time. 

But anyhow, we prepared these 
examinations from personnel in our 
organization—that is, members of various 
state boards wrote portions of the examination, 
and they were checked and approved or 
changed. And then that examination was 
given at the same time in all of these places. 
(Utah didn’t come in with us because their 
state law had a requirement that it didn’t fit. 
Two of the states had to get action through 
their legislatures to change requirements of 
the state law in order to do this.) So we did 
this, and it worked out quite well, except that 
Guam and Hawaii and Alaska wanted to 
join with us. And there was a big differential 
in time. And we had a feeling, particularly 
with Guam and—certainly with Guam and 
with Hawaii, possibly, that there could be a 
cable telling what the examination was like 
and let somebody take it with a five-hour 
difference in time, give them time to check 
up the whole examination and pass it, which 
probably never would have happened. But we 



112 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


did have, in Utah, when they finally came in, 
a complaint in Arizona, the examination had 
been leaked, and a couple of applicants had 
copies of the examination before they took it. 

Otherwise, though, this western 
Association worked out very well. We have 
yearly meetings, and we have a secretary in 
Olympia, Washington, who keeps us advised 
of what’s going on in all twelve of the states 
and Honolulu and Alaska. We’re coming 
to the point now where we are discussing 
the disbanding of this organization because 
NCARB is becoming more and more useful. 

So we feel that we did a good thing for the 
profession, and it certainly has worked out that 
architects are traveling those architects that— 
oh, an architect for Safeway, an architect for 
Holiday. (Now, the architect for Holiday that 
came in for registration told me that Holiday 
now designs their motels by computer, that 
they program a computer for, we’ll say, Reno. 
There’s a list of 4,000 questions. And they 
program the computer, and the computer 
comes up with about what they should do— 
how many rooms, the type of building—the 
works. And then this computer information 
is given out to some local architect, who, 
under the supervision of the staff architect 
for the organization, prepares the plans for 
the local job.) 

The theme of the last two meetings 
of the National Council for Architectural 
Registration Boards is change. At our last 
meeting, we had representatives from England, 
the president of the Royal British Institute 
of Architects, and his second in command 
came over—lovely people, just simply lovely 
people. Canada sent the head of their national 
architectural association, Mexico sent a 
couple of people, we had one Japanese, and 
we had Poland—well, I’ve forgotten. We had 
almost worldwide interest in the thought that 
the design and construction of utilities, the 


large organizations’ building is changing, and 
the necessities for expert design in all facets of 
the organization is becoming more and more 
necessary. So the old concept of the architect 
as the man who did it all has passed. 

[I will tell about the organization of the 
AIA chapter here.] Well, the AIA chapter 
started with, I think, seven or eight architects. 
I was one of the first chairmen, I remember. 
In fact, there’re so few of us, I was chairman 
a couple or three times. I don’t know whether 
we got a charter, or what, from AIA, but we 
were recognized as a chapter of the American 
Institute of Architects. And as the architects, 
the local architects, continued to grow, and 
as the youngsters continued to increase who 
were working toward registration, we got a 
larger and larger chapter, and we had quite a 
group of junior AIA members. They recognize 
the juniors, and they allow them what they 
call a junior AIA member, but the juniors 
don’t vote to spend our money, [laughing] 
or anything of that sort. And it got to be 
rather unwieldy in that with one chapter, we 
either held meetings in Reno or meetings in 
Las Vegas. To get rid of that, we held them 
in Tonopah. And they came up from Las 
Vegas to Tonopah, and we went down from 
Tonopah. And this also got to be quite a chore 
because the facilities there were not very good. 
And the sleeping quarters that we got, I think 
the beds must’ve been sixty years old! And we 
got tired of that, so what we did, we broke up 
into two chapters, the northern chapter and 
the southern chapter. I’m not familiar with the 
southern chapter. I think it’s a little larger than 
we are up here. But we have our own meetings 
here, and we have speakers and that sort of 
thing. Industry is very happy to send films and 
representatives to talk about their products or 
their methods, and that sort of thing. So we 
have two functioning AIA chapters in Nevada, 



Activities with Professional Organizations 


113 


and they’re both doing what I consider to be 
an excellent job. 

They are sponsoring classes for these junior 
men so that in the upcoming examination, 
they can have, we’ll say, six weeks (one night 
a week or two nights a week, whatever can be 
worked out) of instruction in some subject or 
subjects in which they are weak to help them 
become registered. This is our business, is to 
see that qualified people are registered and 
that the profession in our state is practiced 
in accordance with the ethics of the AIA. 
The ethics are just simple horse sense; I don’t 
know what you’d call them, honesty and 
forthrightness, and [laughing) all the rest of 
that idealistic stuff. They don’t mention your 
religion, but they damn near do. So that’s AIA. 




12 


Commentary on Changes in 
Practice of Architecture, 1920-1970; 
Changes in Building Materials 


Well, I can say this, and I think I’ve said 
it before, that the practice of architecture was 
not regulated in 1920. You could say, “I’m an 
architect,” take jobs, design buildings, and 
there was nobody in the city or anyplace else 
that checked your work to see if it was safe 
from falling down. Contractors, if they had to 
build something that didn’t look safe, they’d 
complain. That’s about where you got your 
protection. We did not have air conditioning. 
We did not have the appliances that we have 
today. An electric light was just more or less of 
a matter of a switch and a light on the ceiling. 
When they began to use floor lamps and cut 
lamps off the ceiling, why, this was quite an 
innovation. And I think some of us thought 
it was never going to work anyhow. And with 
the early floor lamps, it didn’t do too much 
good; you had to sit alongside them. 

As I say, we didn’t have air conditioning. 
The only air heat we had was what was called 
a floor furnace. You got a real hot fire going, 
and the hot air came up from the floor and 
went up to the ceiling, and then it gradually 
came down ’til it got at the height of your 


head and you got a headache. And to get it 
down to the point where it was comfortable 
for children to play on the floor, the older folks 
were in trouble because it was just too hot up 
where they were. 

Heat was largely a matter of steam 
radiation, or hot water radiation, either one. 
And I could design either steam or hot water 
radiation satisfactorily. I was conversant with 
boiler design, with chimneys adequate to burn 
the fuel. The burners were nothing like the 
automatic furnace that you have today, and 
as a matter of fact, a great deal of the firing 
was done with coal, you built a fire and you 
put coal on it, and you continued to put coal 
on it. You learned to bank your coal fires so 
they’d stay all night, shovel some coal on it in 
the morning. 

So I would design. Electrical work was 
very easy for me at the time. I designed the 
electrical installation, I designed the heating, 
and what ventilating I could think of. We used 
to have what we called a nighttime ventilator, 
which was simply a matter of pulling the air 
out of the attic, cooling that off. And I did the 



116 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


structural engineering and the architectural 
work and the specifications—the whole 
thing, the whole bit. And this you could do, 
because if you did it about right, it was okay 
And if there had to be some changes made, 
the contractor usually complained about 
something and you made some changes, 
and then things went along without much 
trouble. 

Then there came the innovations. I 
remember that before World War II, for a long 
time, we had had very expensive panel boards 
for the lighting in the house, panel board that 
had a bronze framed cover with a cylinder 
lock on it, and it had a lot of connections on 
the inside, and they were quite expensive for 
the time, like fifty, sixty, seventy dollars. 

It was in the Depression. The minute the 
Depression came along and people couldn’t 
buy that sort of thing, of f the shelves came 
inventions that had been sitting there for a 
long time that were cheapening these things. 
And one of the inventions was a little box that 
held four circuits, cost about two dollars and 
fifty cents, perfectly adequate to put in the wall 
and take care of your home lighting, instead of 
fifty, sixty, seventy dollars. A lot of things, a lot 
of things that were economical, came about 
during the Depression. And they had not 
manufactured them before because they could 
charge more money for more elaborate things. 
This is part of the way economics works. 

We began to get oil burners with controls, 
and pretty soon it became necessary that you 
have somebody tell you what kind of an oil 
burner you ought to have and what kind of 
oil you should burn in it. And then we began 
to get the floor plugs around for appliances. 
And, in the early days, people would take a 
floor plug and they’d put their lighting on it, 
lamps, and so forth, and then they’d put an 
iron on it, and then they’d put a something 
else on it, and the next thing you know, they 


had so much current going through there that 
they got a fire. 

And I can remember when I did—oh, 
one of the jobs I did was the Golden Rule 
Store for Mr. [John A.] Cooper. And I was 
adding or remodeling a second floor for the 
Golden Rule Store. And I went in to check 
their wiring in the attic. And they had their 
show windows. And at that time, the lighting 
in show windows was coming in for a lot of 
revision, the intensity of the light, and all 
that sort of thing, and the effect of light on 
colors. For instance, the use of fluorescent 
tubes ruined—would turn some colors black 
in a show window. 

Well, anyhow, they had been increasing 
the amount of light in these show windows 
without increasing the wires from the panel 
board. (You know what a panel board is. A 
panel board, the lights come in from the city 
streets to your house, and they’re put to a 
panel board. That puts all the power you’re 
going to need all in one place, and then you 
take of f circuits from there to light two rooms 
and light these two rooms, and it’s for a stove, 
and so forth.) Anyhow, they had increased 
the lighting in these show windows to the 
point that the wires were badly overloaded. 
And when I went in the attic to check some 
of them, the insulation had been baked by the 
heat in the wires to the point that it would fall 
off if you touched it. And it would be very 
simple for one of these mice, or something, 
to take a little gnaw at a wire to see if it was 
any good. Now, off comes the insulation, 
there’s a short, and you could have a fire. I 
had to change the wiring completely. Now, 
this happened in a large number of stores. 
They increase the use of the electricity on the 
original wiring, which was done with No. 14 
wire, usually, and it should have No. 12 wire. 

Today, No. 12 wire, for just one circuit of 
1,500 watts, is almost standard. They won’t go 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


117 


any more than that. They will not let you, by 
regulation, put wore than four appliances on a 
floor plug. You have a duplex floor plug. They 
have gradually increased the size of wiring 
because of the increase in use of electricity, 
and regulated the number of connections that 
can be made to various kinds of outlets. And 
it has been quite necessary. 

This has come to the point now where, 
with motors for air conditioning work, 
compressors, and fan motors running day and 
night for all year, sometimes, that it became 
necessary that their bearings be designed 
so that as much as possible they should be 
lifetime lubricated so that you don’t have to 
put oil on anything. In the early days, you had 
to put oil on everything. You had to go around 
and—most people just didn’t do it until it got 
to the point where it wore out. You had to put 
new bearings in a lot of pieces of equipment, 
because without oil, they wore down, and then 
the thing began to jerk, rattle. 

So there was electricity. It got so 
complicated that gradually, it became 
necessary that you have some engineer do 
your work. Then the first thing you did was 
to go to the power company and locate some 
engineer and get him to moonlight and do 
some work for you, which usually turned 
out to be unsatisfactory because he was not 
a designer. The engineers began to appear on 
the scene, and you began to hire a consulting 
engineer for your work. And this happened 
with heating, with ventilating, and finally, 
you began to get mechanical engineers 
who were licensed in their areas by the city, 
or the state, to do their work. They had to 
have certain education, they had to have 
certain qualifications, they had to take an 
examination. You hired one of those people 
to do your heating, your ventilating, and 
your plumbing—a sanitary engineer (they 
were both). The electrical engineers likewise 


became specialists. And an architect had to 
hire an electrical engineer because he could 
not do, again, what I used to do. He couldn’t 
keep up with it. 

And so then acoustics began to come into 
the picture. People going to auditoriums, they 
began to have larger and larger auditoriums, 
and they began to have more and more 
features going into those auditoriums because 
the population was increasing rapidly. And 
a lot of people were interested in a lot of 
different things, and they couldn’t hear well. 
And what’s the use of an auditorium? They 
quit using it, almost. So they began to try 
to correct faulty acoustics so that you could 
hear in an auditorium. And pretty soon, it 
became necessary to have an engineer who 
was a specialist in acoustics. 

Materials, shape of the room, the whole 
works—everything involved in acoustics is 
a specialty, the reflection of sound off the 
walls so that it doesn’t come back above the 
threshold of sound. It’s all right if it comes 
back at you, but if you can’t hear it, it doesn’t 
bother you. But if I speak to you here, and 
my sound traveled, say, a hundred feet to 
a reflecting surface which bounced it back 
to you, and you heard me say the word and 
then you heard the tail end of the word all 
fuzzed up as it reflected back to you, pretty 
soon it would be hard to understand me, 
and you’d be tired of listening to me. That’s 
what acoustics is all about. That’s when 
they began to design these acoustic tiles 
with holes in them. The tiles were such that 
high frequencies would hit the tiles and 
go into these holes and be trapped, and a 
large percentage of that sound would not 
be reflected back because the holes trapped 
it. But the lower pitched sounds, the long 
distance waves, would hit the tile, which was 
soft, and it would give and not reflect back 
like a hard surface would. 



118 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


The early theory of acoustics was a hair- 
felt blanket that gave when sound waves hit 
it and did not reflect it back. And then they 
came to realize that these short wave sounds, 
the high pitched sounds, came back anyhow 
So they put some holes in. And the sound 
waves got into those holes, and a certain 
proportion of them were trapped there. And 
as long as they could reduce sound below 
what they call the threshold of sound, or the 
threshold of hearing, why, it would not affect 
you. They can’t kill it; it bounces around. 
Nobody knows how long sound bounces 
around in an auditorium. Instruments show 
that it goes quite a time after, and by quite a 
time—this is a very, very short time, in terms 
of seconds. But for quite a time, it’s bouncing 
around in there before it dies out completely. 

So there you are, with your structural 
engineer suddenly becoming necessary, your 
mechanical engineer, acoustical engineer, 
your electrical engineer. And then you began 
to need designers who were familiar with the 
products that were available because we began 
to get a terrific number of products that we 
could use. Some of them were economical, 
some of them were very beautiful, and things 
were changing. You used to use hardwood 
in three quarter-inch thicknesses. And as 
hardwood became scarce, they began to 
make it thinner and thinner ’til pretty soon, 
they were putting out oak flooring three 
eights of an inch thick. And then they began 
to put it out a sixteenth of an inch thick and 
paste it on a background. They even started 
photographing it, [laughing] putting the 
photographs on a background. 

Plastics came along. And plastics is 
going to materially affect design before long. 
Aluminum came up, and they began to be able 
to alloy aluminum, to weld aluminum, which 
they couldn’t do when they first began to put 
it out. Aluminum will be more and more 


important in the structures as time goes on, 
and aluminum is one of the most available 
elements in the world. It’s everyplace! Getting 
it out, of course, may be a little difficult, but 
there’s lots of aluminum. 

And then we began to feel that planning 
needed a man, that you planned a building 
for the use to which it was being put, that 
if you designed a home for a man who had 
two children and was going to have no more 
children (his children would go to school and 
then leave in the normal course of events), he 
would have the facilities, the living facilities, 
for the four people. And then, if those people 
entertained a great deal, that house would 
have to be Bet up so that entertainment was 
facilitated. If they had a lot of children over 
to play, and so forth, it became necessary that 
they’re able to do that. 

Also, at that time, they began to feel that 
the practice of burying all of the utilities— 
electric wires and drainpipes and water pipes, 
and so forth—was very bad because you 
couldn’t get at them to repair them without 
tearing the house up. So there was another 
factor in design, to try and get these things so 
they could be maintained comfortably. And 
this started with homes. And then, simply as 
the engineer who designs, we’ll say, a mining 
operation, a mining mill, [he] made what he 
called a flow line diagram. If the ore came in 
here, something happened to it; it went from 
there to something else, something happened; 
it went from there to someplace else, and 
from there, someplace else. This was called 
the flow line. And he tried to design a mill 
that economically and efficiently carried out 
this series of treatment for his ore. The same 
thing became necessary in the larger and 
larger and more complicated buildings that 
were necessary for modern industry. 

Modern industry now has a separate 
machine for almost everything you want to 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


119 


do. And that machine has to have power. 
Frequently, the product has to have a 
climate—that is, a humidity in the air, and a 
temperature of the air. Sometimes, it must be 
maintained. In the design of a big bridge, such 
as the Bay Bridge, we’ll say, [in) the structural 
steel, they realized that when they’re going 
to come out from one shore with a steel 
structure and out from the other shore with 
a steel structure ’til they get within five or six 
hundred or a thousand feet of each other, and 
then they’re going to drop in between them 
a prefabricated structure that they can put a 
pin in this end and a pin in that end, and they 
have finished the bridge, they suddenly find 
that if the steel was designed and fabricated in 
a plant where the temperature varied up to a 
hundred degrees from seventy, and they took 
it out, it was not the length that it should be. 
So they have to take the average temperature, 
we’ll say at midnight on the Bay Bridge, in 
the summertime or whatever time of the year 
they’re going to put this thing in, and they’re 
going to fabricate this steel at that temperature 
in their factory. They’re going to keep it there 
as much as they can. When it’s put together, 
they bring this material out to the bridge. 
And they hoist it up to fit in between these 
two ends. And suddenly they find that it’s 
eighteen inches too long or too short (it 
happened to be—with this particular thing in 
the Bay Bridge, it was eighteen inches out of 
line). And very shortly, the weather changed, 
and the steel cooled a little bit (I think it 
was cooled), and the contraction of the steel 
brought it back to the point where they could 
drive in this pin. The pin is only about this big 
around [a foot or so] and weighed about ten 
tons [laughing]. And so everything had to be 
just exactly right. 

Another thing that illustrates that need 
for exactitude was the setting of the anchor 
bolts for some of the bridge sections where 


the anchor bolt is something that fastens the 
bridge to a concrete foundation, we’ll say. And 
the anchor bolts could be this big around [four 
inches] and that long [eighteen inches]. 

They tried to shoot [with transits] the 
location of anchor bolts from three locations. 
One of the locations was on the Albers 
mill buildings, and one of them was over 
in Oakland someplace, and one was on the 
island. Each one of those men would line 
up and shoot where he thought that bolt 
should be. And if they didn’t intersect in a 
point, those three men continued to work 
with their instruments and tried to find out 
exactly what had happened that they didn’t 
intersect in the point. And they never tried to 
set those bolts until those three instruments 
were right together, that that was the place 
the bolt should be. Well, one day, they could 
not get one of the instruments to jibe in with 
the other two. They couldn’t figure what was 
wrong. And they were a week working on it. 

And finally [laughing], one of the men 
said, “You see that spar out there?” Now, this 
was a thing like a telephone pole floating in 
the water, and I think it was used as an anchor 
for small boats to come out and tie up to it, like 
a buoy. It developed that that thing was right 
alongside— not in the line of sight from this 
man, but real close to it, like four, five feet, and 
that the light rays from the sun hitting that 
thing bounced a little bit. And that deflected 
his sight. They moved that spar, and he zeroed 
in with the rest of them. 

So exactitude becomes necessary in many 
of our modern buildings because a great many 
things are prefabricated in one location and 
brought to the building. This, again, creates 
the necessity for experience and knowledge 
and exactness that requires, very frequently, 
a specialist to help the architect. 

It’s been, oh, so interesting, the change 
in construction. In the early 1900’s, when 



120 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


McKim, Mead, and White were famous 
architects in New York City and they designed 
buildings. The buildings always had stone 
cornices, and they had stone columns and 
capitals, and it was very expensive. And as 
the economy became a little more and more 
strained through the years, they began to 
cut out those things. And the last of those 
masonry or clay products decorations to go 
was terra-cotta, which they used to burn in 
colors, even, for you. It’s very expensive to 
get any terra-cotta. Matter of fact, there’s only 
one place on the West Coast that makes terra¬ 
cotta, that is, modeled terra-cotta. 

It became more and more necessary 
that architects design more severely, we’ll 
say, and they began to talk about the lines 
of a building, the overall effect of a building, 
because of its outlines, not because it had a lot 
of gimcracks on it. Now, we’re getting down to 
real design in my book. But what happens in 
commercial design is that up they go, twenty, 
thirty stories, and fill the thing with glass, and 
that’s it. Or, they run some verticals up and 
fill it in with standard panels, fill in between 
these verticals at each floor with standard 
panels of aluminum of one kind or another, 
and put the glass in those. The spandrels are 
insulated to stop the exchange of heat in or 
out, comparable with that of a brick wall. Mid 
suddenly, we have a building which, instead of 
having a brick fascia, or a brick outside wall 
which is very heavy, has an aluminum outside 
wall with light insulation in it. And suddenly, 
your design is materially effective because it’s 
only carrying a small portion of the weight 
that it had to carry before. The design of 
buildings, as I say, has been materially affected 
by the economics of the country. And a great 
deal of careless design has gone on because 
architects didn’t figure there was a chance of 
building unless they got it right down to the 
lowest bit of cost. 


So the attitude today, as I started to say 
about the planner, is a man who delves into 
your business. In a hotel, for instance, how 
many rooms can a maid handle? And how 
should you design it so that everything is 
handy—the supplies from the basement are 
handy, the storage on each floor is handy, 
the kind of dollies that you will load up—so 
as to get the maximum number of rooms 
per maid. And then immediately you begin 
talking about the furniture that will take the 
least amount of maintenance, and the rugs 
that will take the beating, and also the rugs 
that can be best cleaned with the kind of a 
vacuum they’re going to put in, whether or not 
they’ll have a machine vacuum or appliance 
vacuum (machine vacuum—I mean a central 
vacuum plant; many buildings did that for 
a while). So the planner finds out what you 
want to do, what your costs of doing business 
are approximately, and what your income 
from the thing you turn out is, and what your 
margin of profit is, and he tries to design 
a building that will give you, with profit, 
the kind of a facility that you need. And it 
frequently comes that the man’s ideas—the 
experienced manufacturer’s ideas have to be 
modified because the planner shows him a 
better way. So a planner becomes a part of 
an organization. 

The next thing that happens, they begin 
to say, “Now, we have zoning ordinances, and 
so forth. The kind of a building that you can 
put in a residential district is one kind, and 
the kind you can put down among a lot of 
steel mills is another kind.” And you have an 
urban designer, a man who tries to take care of 
the environments and make them easy, make 
them pleasing for the people who have to live 
in them. So now we have an urban designer 
who has to move in on the big projects. 

The projects are changing from what was 
a big project at a million dollars forty years 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


121 


ago to fifty million, a hundred million, and 
nobody thinks anything of a hundred million 
dollar project. But as these projects grew in 
importance and size, the matter of getting 
the money for them at an interest rate that 
you could afford to pay becomes vital. So 
here comes a credit man who can now take 
what the planner lays out. The estimator (and 
this is another man that has to come into the 
picture pretty soon) is a man who can estimate 
the cost of a project, with the contractors 
using modern equipment of all kinds to do 
away with labor costs as much as he can, 
with a contractor that prefabricates and that 
panelizes, he’s made his estimate. 

Now your credit man walks in, and he 
checks the credit of the owner, checks his 
financial condition. And he then can go to 
the bank, and he can say, “Here is this man, 
and this is his financial condition. Here is this 
building that he needs to expand his project, 
or a new one (whatever it may be). This 
building is going to cost so much money. It 
will turn out this much business. It will make 
this much profit under today’s conditions and 
projected conditions, it will increase, or it 
won’t be as good” (but he has to project at least 
ten years for a loan). And he finds out that the 
bank can’t lend him the money because they 
have regulations, the federal people, that they 
can’t go that high. 

So he goes to an insurance company, and 
he puts the same thing up to them, And they 
can lend him money. He goes someplace 
else, and they can take a second mortgage if 
it’s necessary. And he might get somebody to 
loan the bulk of the money and someone to 
take a second mortgage on the furnishings, 
or something of that sort. 

Now, when [Abe] Zetooney built the El 
Cortez, he signed up a lease for ten percent 
with the operator. And the operator bought 
the furniture on tick. At that time, gambling 


came back and six weeks’ divorce went into 
effect, and in two years the operator paid off 
the entire cost of his furnishings, paid his ten 
percent rents as they came along, and made 
a nice profit. So a credit man, in that kind 
of project, would be considering whether or 
not it was possible for six weeks’ divorce to 
be voted in, and it was possible for gambling 
to be voted back. And that if that happened, 
then a building that had been designed to 
rent for two dollars and fifty cents a night, 
they could get anything more than that that 
you want. But nobody up and down the 
street could rent any lower than that. So you 
met your competition at two dollars and fifty 
cents a night. He got six dollars a night on a 
building that was designed to rent for two 
fifty a night! So the credit man, in that case, 
would have been a very valuable adjunct, 
although it didn’t make any difference. They 
did it anyhow. But that’s what I mean by the 
credit man. 

Now, speaking of computers, my partner, 
Graham (and he’d probably give you some 
dope on this), went to a computer school in 
order that he might learn how to program a 
computer. This was in relation with our job 
at the University, where there will be quite 
a bit of computer [work] going on in the 
educational building, computer work. And 
while he was there, they mentioned the fact 
that in making preliminary drawings that 
you could make a preliminary which roughly 
satisfied the requirements of your owner with 
just lines. You didn’t put a lot of data all over 
the place, but you’re just breaking up the 
spaces and the traffic such that it complied 
with the necessities for the owner, and that 
you then put that into a computer. And the 
computer would then give you a preliminary 
drawing. We’ll say that your drawing was 
taken looking straight at the building. But you 
wanted to find out what it would look like on a 



122 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


hill, six or seven hundred feet higher than you, 
and a quarter of a mile away The computer 
would give you a drawing of this building that 
you had made from that viewpoint. 

The way it was worked out, you had to 
give the coordinate. You had a sheet with a 
lot of little lines both ways, and here was one 
end of a line, and here was the other end of a 
line. So you gave it [to] the computer there. 
That was sixty that way and eleven this way 
[gesturing], and this was ten this way and nine 
this way. That defined one line in the drawing. 
And you defined all the lines in the drawing 
in that manner. And the computer, then, 
from then on, would take over and furnish 
you as many views of that particular layout as 
you wished for about three to four hundred 
dollars. And we figured that it would cost 
us in the neighborhood of fifteen hundred 
dollars to do the same sort of thing, several 
different ways of looking at a preliminary. So 
there’s one thing that computers have come 
into. Whether it’s valuable or not remains to 
be seen. It’s being used from time to time, and 
they may drop it. It may get good. 

And, of course, I was very interested 
in the fact that Holiday motels have to go 
through a computer preliminary before 
they start making a building. This all ties in 
again with, I think, what I have said about 
organizations that have a real estate man, 
a credit man, financial man, a designer, an 
engineer, air conditioning man, and so forth, 
in one organization. So as they go through a 
building, they prepare f or all of these things. 
It’s very simple, that, if you’re going to have 
air conditioning with big sheet metal ducts 
running around, there’s got to be room for 
the ducts. And some designer or planner— 
we’ll say a planner is the first man to get busy 
on it—may not have sufficient information 
to say, “Well, I’ll have to have a first floor of 
twenty-two feet in height in order that I can 


have a twelve-foot ceiling and enough room 
for the duct work.” 

So an air conditioning man who is handy 
there says, “well, from this thing, I think you 
should have six feet available between the first 
and second floors for the duct work. You’ve 
got to have some vertical shafts here and there 
through the entire building, the same as your 
elevators and your stairways go through, in 
order to get duct work up and down, and 
piping up and down.” And that’s the electrical 
man, too. 

I think one of the first organizations to 
function that way was in Omaha. And they 
built a life insurance company building, 
and they wanted light that was the same, 
practically, as outdoor light in the shade. 
They wanted no shadows of pens and hands 
on paperwork. So they had overall ceiling 
light. And they used radiant heat. And they 
had warm walls, warm floors, and, of course, 
warm ceilings, too. And the heat, radiant heat, 
when it hits you, it’s dead. When radiant heat 
hits you here, you absorb what there is of it, 
but it can’t go anyplace else. You’ve killed that. 
Well, if you’ve got it coming from above and 
below and from all four sides, every square 
inch of your body gets an amount of heat that 
is comfortable. And you have no draffs. So this 
building, then, did that. And you can imagine 
the technical assistance that was necessary 
in order that each room could have the 
appropriate amount of radiant heat and the 
right amount of light. If you wanted a hundred 
foot-candles at desk height, for instance, you 
would have to have a certain amount of light, 
and you also had to have light that would 
not generate a lot of heat. You couldn’t put 
light all over a ceiling, electrical appliances 
all over a ceiling, without generating a great 
deal of heat when they were incandescent. 
But when they’re fluorescent, you can get light 
that’s almost cool, as far as the generation 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


123 


of heat is concerned. So all these things go 
together, and it’s part of this entire scheme 
that organizations, architectural organizations 
are reacting to the necessities of the day, and 
along with registration and all the rest of these 
things, they’re all changing. 

When I first practiced architecture, the 
Rena Press Brick Company here was in full 
bloom. We had excellent brick available as a 
building material, and building after building 
after building went up in brick. We had brick 
masons, too, who knew their business, so that 
a great deal of building work was done with 
brick. And it was common brick; you didn’t 
make a face brick. If you made face brick, you 
had to bring them in and the freight on them 
was terrific. So we didn’t have a great deal of 
face brick. 

I told you about the Cladianos building. 
That is, I think, a rather classic example of 
brickwork of those days, when they would cut 
brick and make patterns with brick, and be 
careful of it and be proud of it when they got 
through. They would be sure that the joints 
were uniform, and all that sort of thing. 

I remember in the El Cortez Hotel was 
one of the first instances of union interference 
in brickwork. There was a man in the middle 
of the line—the way they do brickwork, they 
have a roan at this—at one end of a wall and 
a man at the other end of a wall, and they 
build up four, five, six courses of brick very 
carefully, just right, to what they call a story 
pole. They mark out on this pole (they used 
to, anyhow) —mark out on this pole every 
course of brick from story to story. And they 
called it a story pole. And on the corners, 
they’d set these up, and they’d then lay brick to 
these exact courses. The thickness of the joints 
was set so that the brick would work exactly 
from floor to floor the way they should, or 
in any way that you needed to have courses 
of brickwork to fixed measurements. They’d 


make the story pole between those fixed 
measurements and then you’d lay the brick 
as it had been laid out on the story pole. And 
on the two ends, these fellows would lay up 
six or eight courses of brick; and then, when 
they got that done, they’d string a line from 
this course to the same course at the other 
end, pull it taut. And then the bricklayers in 
between would lay all the brick to that line 
so that you had good, level courses of brick 
and that the joints were all the same. And it 
worked from story to story. 

Well, there was a fellow working in the 
middle of the wall (there were probably six or 
eight bricklayers along each [side], building a 
section of the wall). This fellow working in the 
middle, he was not only laying up the brick, 
he was a fast worker. And he was busy putting 
in brick, and he could lay four or five bricks 
for this man, four or five bricks for this man 
[gestures], and he was told to slow down. He 
said, “I can’t slow down. That’s the way I work.” 

So after a couple or three days with him 
showing up three other bricklayers as being 
a little bit slow, he found himself laying in the 
gutter one night with a bloody nose and some 
teeth gone, and—really fixed up. And he left 
town the next day. 

That’s the first time I remember of union 
interference in buildings. And that was in 
19—El Cortez must be thirty years old, at 
least, maybe more. Must’ve been back in 
1930, or something like that. (The first union 
I remember is the IATSE, the International 
Association of Theatrical Stage employees 
[which] came in here.) 

However, we used a great deal of 
brickwork, and we used a lumber, a material 
which was called Oregon pine. It’s a lumber 
from Washington and Oregon, which is now 
called Douglas fir. It’s a very fine structural 
lumber, quite strong, and also ponderosa pine, 
which is a relatively weak lumber, but actually 



124 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


very good for construction work. Most all 
of the early buildings that I have torn into 
had ponderosa pine joists, floor joists, and 
ponderosa pine studding. And they were not 
surfaced as they do nowadays. They were just 
sawn, and the rough, sawed surface was left 
and put in the building that way. 

As time went on, staying with the lumber 
for the time being, the Douglas fir, of course, 
or the Oregon pine was shipped in here from 
the northwest. And the war came along (this 
was World War II), and the lumber interests 
said they wanted to shave some of the lumber 
off of the studs and joists to save freight, and 
that they would increase the working stresses 
of this lumber to make up for it. Because you 
had a smaller joist, it was weaker. But if you 
increased the working stress from 1,600 to 
1,800 pounds a square inch, that two hundred 
pounds made up for the difference. And the 
same j oist did the same job. They justified the 
increase in the working stresses by saying that, 
“We didn’t grade it at all for a while; we just 
sawed it up and sold it. Then we began to sell it 
in various grades at different prices, get a little 
bit more money that way for the material.” 

So this was a temporary thing when they 
started. They were putting up these quick 
buildings for big barracks, and so forth, -or 
the Army and the Navy. And these would be 
torn down, of course, and when they got back 
to doing civilian building, why, we’d get back 
with the old working stresses. But we never 
got back with the old working stresses, As a 
matter of fact, there was a further reduction 
in the size of the joists, so that a two-by-four 
is one and five-eighths inches by three and 
five-eighths inches. And a two-by-six is one 
and five-eighths inches by five and a half 
inches. It isn’t actually two-by-six at all, Of 
course, [when] they did that, they got more 
joists per tree, they got less freight costs per 
joist, and they got higher working stresses so 


that the lumber was more available for larger 
construction purposes. 

And then they began to kiln dry joists so 
that they wouldn’t shrink. Now, for instance, 
when I built the first addition to the El Cortez 
Hotel, I had to put in wood joists, new wood 
joists, alongside of old wood joists. Now, the 
old wood joists had shrunk as much as half an 
inch. Just to give you an idea about shrinkage, 
I found two-by-fourteen joists (which is 
supposed to be thirteen and a half inches) in 
the Parkway Hotel when it was figuring on 
doing some work there that had shrunk, and 
they were twelve and a half inches in depth, 
instead of thirteen and a half inches—shrunk 
a full inch. 

So if you put in green lumber, naturally, it’s 
going to dry out and shrink. And some of the 
lumber that we got after World War I, if you 
hit it with a hammer, you had water in your 
eye [laughing] (that’s what they used to say). 

Well, anyhow, they began. On this El 
Cortez thing, I used kiln-dried joists, two- 
by-fourteens, and put them level with the 
old joists where the floors joined, and they’ve 
stayed there. The kiln-dried joists did not 
shrink. And there’s no crack in the floor or 
no bump in the floor where these two things 
came together. And then they began to put in 
creosote on some to make them waterproof 
so that they wouldn’t dry rot. And then 
they also began to treat lumber with some 
impregnation that made it difficult for it [to] 
burn. 

So as of today, we’ve started with rough- 
sawn ponderosa pine out of our local timbers. 
We practically never use ponderosa pine at 
all for structural purposes any more. [We’ve] 
come through Douglas fir, and then the 
reduction in size of Douglas fir, the increase in 
working stresses of Douglas fir, the treatment 
of the joists to stop rot. For instance, when 
you put studs down over a floor, you usually 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


125 


waterproof—what they call waterproof—the 
lower foot or so of them so that water can’t 
get in and be sucked up and rot the joists. So 
we’ve had the treatment for waterproofing, 
we’ve had the treatment for fireproofing. 

And we have had in the back of the minds 
of the lumber people for a long time the 
possibility of grinding up lumber— the trees, 
roots, limbs, trunk—everything, and then 
cementing it back together into a structural 
member such as a joist or a stud which would 
have a positive working strength for all joists. 
And it was always there. It didn’t have knots, 
it didn’t have imperfections, didn’t have 
cracks, wains, bark, or knots to change the 
characteristics, the working characteristics of a 
piece of lumber. They would be uniform. And 
they have come to the point now where they 
make what they call particle board and chip 
board. Particle board is ground-up lumber 
cemented together, which is constant in size. 
It won’t shrink. And they make doors of it. 

I have doors in St. Mary’s Hospital four 
feet wide that close exactly, today, the same as 
they did when they were first put in. And they 
haven’t warped, they haven’t shrunk, changed 
in size in any way. They’re just perfect. They 
cover this particle board now with various 
types of materials, vinyl materials, which are 
very hard and which they can simulate the 
grain of wood. They could make it look like 
mahogany or like oak—most anything they 
want to make it look like. And it’s hard and 
impervious, and you will get a door which 
doesn’t even have to be painted, some of 
them, with these coversine. Sometimes they 
can photograph grains of wood and put it on 
these coverings. They’re about a sixteenth of 
an inch thick. They’re put on with glue under 
pressures of maybe 2- 300,000 pounds to 
a door, a great big press that comes down, 
and also in heat up to maybe two hundred 
degrees, with the result that this glue simply 


goes in through the interstices in the particle 
boards, and it’s just one solid material. They 
don’t come apart, they don’t crack off. 

They have a process now in which they 
try to put these materials together, particle 
board and the surface materials, with just glue 
and a little pressure and a hammer, no heat 
and no great big press. And where they have 
small pieces that go along the edge of a door 
or something, they take a rubber Hammer 
and—. It doesn’t stay, though. Well, that about 
takes care of wood. 

Well, steel, we used to have a steel which 
we thought would work at 16,000 pounds 
to the square inch. It was in WIN beams 
and angles and channels, and so forth. The 
design of the steel—they didn’t have very 
good handbooks originally to tell you exact 
dimensions of steel and exact qualifications, 
or we call them properties of steel. And we 
didn’t use too much steel. It wasn’t readily 
available. 

Also, there weren’t engineers that were 
familiar enough with the fabrication of steel 
to design steel buildings in outlying areas 
in these big cities. Of course, they were in 
outlying areas where a lot of practical building 
went on. They weren’t able to properly design 
the steel, and they didn’t do much welding, 
either, at all in those days. Everything was 
riveting. 

I was one of the first architects to decide to 
specialize on steel, back in the ’20’s, late ’20’s. 
And I did it because steel was a permanent 
material. It had a size, and the size stayed 
there. And the size buildings that I built, I 
didn’t have to worry about expansion and 
contraction. It didn’t expand and contract 
enough to make any difference. Now you do. 
you have to provide chances for it to move 
a little without warping. I also did the steel 
because I was disenchanted with reinforced 
concrete. 



126 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


The concrete mixes of the day were— 
many of them were done by hand. They’d 
put down a big board platform and they’d 
throw the materials on there by the shovelful. 
They’d count shovels. Some were big shovels, 
and some were little shovels [laughing]. And 
maybe they couldn’t count. And then, they’d 
throw up so many shovels of rock and so 
many shovels of sand and so many shovels 
of cement, and throw some water on, and 
then they’d take and turn it back and forth to 
mix it. And they get tired along around two 
o’clock in the afternoon. So it didn’t get very 
well mixed, either. So the concrete wasn’t first 
class. It developed holes and cracks, and what 
have you. It didn’t have the strength that it 
should have. We worked concrete in those 
days at 900 pounds a square inch. 

Then the reinforcing steel that was put 
in was of two kinds. They had foreign steel. 
Belgian steel came in here, which was not as 
strong as the American steel and was quite 
a bit cheaper. And some contractors would 
try to use Belgian steel on you. And the steel 
placers, people who installed the steel, they, 
also, were not very bright. They’d lay the steel 
in the forms, and then when they poured the 
concrete, they’d stick a pick underneath it 
and pull it up, and you didn’t know where it 
finally lit. 

In the design of reinforced concrete if you 
have a certain thickness of a slab, and you have 
a piece of steel at a definite depth above the 
bottom (we’ll say this is the floor), and you can 
then assign to that slab a certain strength. You 
could hold in a twelve-foot span a hundred 
pounds to the square foot, or something of 
this sort. But if a guy takes a pick and pulls 
it up, and instead of being there, it’s a half an 
inch to an inch higher, that half an inch to 
an inch in the difference of the placement of 
the steel could make a thirty or forty percent 
difference in the strength, because the higher 


the steel is, then the narrower the slab actually 
is. The theory of reinforced concrete is that as 
it tries to sag, the steel keeps it from sagging, 
because steel is strong in tension. Concrete, 
in the top, is in compression. Mad it’s strong 
in compression. So it keeps it from sagging 
with its compression. Well, the placement 
of the steel, then, was so sketchy (and I have 
found slabs with steel in the middle of them 
instead of near the bottom) that, as I say, I was 
disenchanted with the concrete construction. 
And I tried to go to steel and wood. 

Now, in the early days of wood 
construction, they did not pay much attention 
to fire stops. And by a fire stop, it simply 
means—it could be a piece of wood, as far as 
that goes—anything will stop the circulation 
of air that’s between joists or across the 
building under floors, though that sort of 
thing. And where the joists come to the edge 
of a building, there must be no chance for 
air to go around them where joists rest on 
them, on a beam like this [gesturing to show 
right angles]. Then in between each joist, you 
have to have a block so that the hot air can’t 
travel over the top of them. That’s what we 
mean by “fire stops,” something to stop the 
circulation of air, which, in a fire where wood 
creates about forty to fifty times its volume 
in gas, they travel very rapidly under quite 
a bit of pressure. And if these hot gasses are 
blocked from traveling on account of fire 
stops, why, it’s easy to get your fire and put it 
out before it spreads. But I’ve seen fires that 
started on this side of a building [on the left], 
and they were really burning over here [on 
the right]. I told you about a classic incident 
about the B.D. Billinghurst School. I had fire 
stops every place, except one. And there was 
a steel column, just about this square, [that] 
went up from the basement to the roof. And 
you know how steel columns look. They have 
a flange here [gestures], and there’s a hollow 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


127 


space on each end. I didn’t put fire stops in 
that little hollow space. And the result was 
when this fire started in the basement, in the 
furnace room (and it got real hot and burned 
up quite an area around there, two or three 
rooms, actually), the hot gases went up this 
little bit of a flue, and they set the roof on fire. 
And there was a patch of roof there (it must 
have been twenty feet square) that had caught 
fire. And if the firemen hadn’t been there to 
take care of it, why, the roof would’ve gone, 
too, simply because of one steel column, six 
inches square, [which] had two little bits of 
flues up to the top. And the hot gases went up 
and started a fire. 

So the fire stops are very valuable in 
stopping the spread of fire. And that, with 
wood construction—you can put up wood 
construction with large joists and good fire 
stops and a plank floor, and they call it “one- 
hour fire-resistant construction.” A fire can’t 
start a great big chunk of wood burning just 
right now. It’s got to get it hot on the surface, 
and it takes a little time to get it to blazing. 
It’s called heavy timber construction, and it’s 
recognized in the codes. But not much of it 
is done today. 

Well, I started, then, using steal and wood. 
Then steel changed. They began to make 
stronger steels with the alloys that they put 
in it. And they began to roll them to closer 
tolerances. They also began to put out very 
accurate information about their product, to 
the point that, finally, when they built the Bay 
Bridge, we’ll say, the Golden Gate Bridge, they 
had a very high strength steel in the lower 
third of their towers, and a medium strength 
steel in the middle third, and ordinary steel 
that we use in building in the top third. They 
used three different kinds of steel. The cables 
that they use in those bridges is a terrifically 
strong steel, and is something that you can 
hardly bend. A wire that large around (like 


his little finger], sticking up about that far, 
they have to take a sledge hammer to bend it. 

These cables that they make suspension 
bridges of are very high strength, I think on 
the order of 100,300 pounds to the square 
inch. And that’s what I call strong) And the 
way they make a cable for a bridge [is] to take 
one strand of steel on a bobbin, and they go 
across this cable over to the other end and 
down, and fasten it, and then go back. And 
these have to be at exactly the same sag as 
they go to the end that, finally, they can then 
come around with a machine which wraps 
them with heavy, very strong wire, binds them 
into a circle. And they have to be so that they 
fit. They can’t be jammed and leave a hole 
someplace. They must all fit together side 
by side and then be bound, and they make 
this cable out of, oh, say, five hundred or a 
thousand of these single cables. And that’s 
what that great big round cable is, sitting on 
the bridge. But that’s terrifically high strength 
steel. 

Today, they can make steels in which they 
can tell you the strength of that steel, what you 
can use as a design strength for it. They tell 
you how to work it. 

Also, welding has been built up to the 
point now where welding is a rather positive 
science. In the early days of welding, men, if 
they were welding in a shop on a bench like 
this [gesture], they would get real good at that 
welding. But if, all of a sudden, they had to 
weld something that was overhead, no dice. 
They were no good. If they weld something 
on a wall, vertically, they weren’t good. So 
for a while, it became necessary that where 
you were using welders, you qualified them 
for the work they were supposed to do. They 
had to take examinations with the building 
department and show that they could do 
the kind of work that was necessary on your 
building. 



128 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


I can remember here on Harolds Club’s 
seven-story addition, this was all welded 
together. We had a laboratory from San 
Francisco in charge of inspection of all 
welds. And they did it with X-rays and visual 
examinations and a man on the job constantly 
watching the welds. And those welds actually 
replace steel with like steel. There’s no crack. 
It’s all one piece of steel, this gives you a 
construction which was not so feasible in 
the days when they had riveted construction, 
because, by welding, you could run a piece 
over the top of a column and let it stick out. 
That would be a cantilever. 

Now, pretty soon, you ran a beam across 
several columns. And the effect of this was 
that the steel rested on a column here, and 
a column here, on two columns. But when 
it tried to sag, which it—everything sags 
when it’s loaded; I don’t care what it is, steel, 
concrete. It may only sag a thirty-second of 
an inch, but it sags. So when it tried to sag, 
the fact that it was continuous over the top 
here meant that in order to sag, it was going 
to have to raise this up like this [gestures]. If 
it was going to sag here, it was going to have 
to raise this up. Put it couldn’t raise this up, 
because this was loaded, too. And this was 
sagging here. The result was that over the top 
of the columns there was a space two feet, four 
feet, ten feet, depending on the size of the 
construction, in which the beams did not sag 
this way [down]. They sagged this way [over]. 
Now, this means that if I put up two columns 
and just a beam between them, it will sag from 
column to column. But if that column has a 
beam over the top of it, which will not let it sag 
there, then all of a sudden, instead of being—. 
We’ll say those columns are twenty-five feet 
apart. And if I had a simple beam from one 
to the other, it’ll be [a] twenty-five-foot span. 
And it would sag like a twenty-five-foot 
beam. But if I have continuous construction 


over the top of the column, then, instead of 
sagging on a twenty-five-foot span, there’s a 
certain distance here that it can’t sag because 
this is going this way [over] and holding it 
up. And on the other side, the same way, and 
suddenly, the twenty-five-foot beam is only 
spanning twenty feet, or eighteen feet. And 
you can use smaller beams. And when you 
use smaller beams, you save money. This 
[is] welded construction and what they call 
continuous beams, and then they got it into 
frames so that the columns and the beams 
and everything were all welded together, and 
[if] anything moved, everything else had to 
move around it. If this beam moved this way, 
the column had to move this way [gestures] 
because that joint was absolutely stiff. See, 
reinforced concrete got to the same place. 
We’ll talk about concrete later. They have now 
built multistory buildings in which they have 
put great, strong beams across the top and 
hung the stories below. Why, I don’t know. 

Structural steel has come to the point now 
where you can put it up outdoors, indoors. 
You can take care of your expansion and your 
contraction. You can have steels of various 
strengths and with various qualities, such 
as the resistance to corrosion, high melting 
points, good weldability. Some articles, like 
when they first started putting out aluminum, 
it was very hard to weld. Now they can weld 
aluminum. Also, aluminum is very stable. 

Well, I guess that about finishes steel 
through the years, give you an idea of the 
constant change that goes on, and the constant 
testing and the constant design of mixtures; 
that is, the various proportions of alloys that 
go into steel in order to make a steel that will 
do a certain job, maybe below water, above 
water, high strength, low strength, and all 
the rest of it. 

Now, reinforced concrete, as I told you, in 
the early days, was pretty much hit-and-miss. 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


129 


Anybody thought they could mix up concrete 
and do a job. But as they began to discover 
that the poor placement of reinforcement 
killed the strength of the building and that 
cracks developed, and sometimes even 
dangerous situations came to pass, then 
they began to be more accurate with the 
reinforcement that they made. In the early 
days, reinforcement was just a plain bar. And 
when you put a plain bar in concrete—by a 
plain bar, I mean round, smooth bar. Then you 
put a plain, round, smooth bar in concrete for 
a floor, we’ll say, and the floor started to sag a 
little bit, this bar got into tension. But you can 
see that if you start something to sag, it gets 
a little bit longer on the bottom and a little 
bit shorter on top. And these smooth bars 
lost their adherence. The concrete slipped on 
them. And the minute the concrete and the 
steel do not remain as one unit, you don’t 
have reinforced concrete any more. You’ve got 
some steel and some concrete, and it’s going 
to fall down. 

So what to do about that? They then 
started twisting the steel so that as it twisted, 
if it tried to slip in the concrete, why, these 
twists came across the line of slip. And it 
wouldn’t slip. And they also said that because 
they twisted it, they engaged the fibers more 
closely together, and it became a stronger 
piece of steel (which was a good sales pitch, 
but not true, necessarily). 

Then they began to manufacture steel 
with deformed surfaces, little knobs on 
them. You’ll see it. Anytime you see steel, it’s 
just full of little knobs. And these are very, 
very effective in stopping any slippage of 
steel in concrete so that you have the natural 
adherence of the concrete to the steel itself, 
plus the lugs that stop any slippage. So that 
took care of that particular situation. 

and then they began to make what they 
called “chairs.” They made steel supports for 


steel bars. And if the bar was supposed to 
be just three quarters of an inch above the 
bottom of a slab—and this is a minimum to 
give fireproofing to the steel. 

Exposed steel in a fire can be heated to 
the point where it just flows. And you don’t 
have anything. As an example of that, there 
was a fire in a service station here in Reno 
twenty, twenty-five years ago. And they had 
some racks made out of one-inch boards that 
held tires. The steel structure sank down and 
rested on top of the boards, and the boards 
were not burned up. The boards were still 
strong enough to hold their tires (what was 
left of them) and the steel. But this was a very 
light steel construction of a service station. It 
just simply sagged and it didn’t fall down like 
wood would. 

That’s one of the things about wood that 
I forgot to tell you, that when you’re making 
wooden trusses and putting them top of 
masonry walls—they used to do all wooden 
trusses. The theory was that if there was a fire 
and the roof burned, that at some point, the 
trusses would just burn apart and fall in. But 
if you had steel trusses, they would sag and 
pull the walls in, too. The wood would fall in 
and leave the walls, but the steel would sag 
and pull the walls in, and your loss would be 
much greater. The insurance companies didn’t 
like that at all. 

And another thing about steel, there 
came a time—and this, I think I told you, 
about a time when I had a convention here, 
and the steel people came in to put light 
steel construction into the code—I think I 
told you that story. Well, they did form up 
all this light steel stuff, and they made it out 
of sheet steel, almost sheet metal, in order to 
compete with wood. And they made studs, 
and they made “I” beams and everything out 
of this very light steel in order to compete 
with wood. And the result is that we do have 



130 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


in the code a paragraph, a chapter, on light 
steel construction. It’s recognized, and they 
still do some of it, particularly in partitions. 
They make up some very light metal studs for 
interior partitions now, that once they have 
been braced together and plastered, they feel 
that this is a unit, that the plaster plus the steel 
(it’s like reinforced concrete, really) is a unit, 
and that it will stand a lot of pressure. And it 
is a very good piece of construction. You can 
also have holes in it and put conduit back and 
forth, through these steel studs, make lots 
of steel studs. Some of them are sheet metal 
studs, and some are made of steel—little steel 
channels, three quarter-inch channels and 
braces in between. 

I’ve used lots of that, metal lath and steel 
studs, and it has a fire rating. If you have 
three quarters of an inch of plaster on it, it 
has a fire rating of one hour, which means 
that in an ordinary fire, it would be an hour 
before this construction would disintegrate. 
So very few fires get to the point where the 
fire department won’t get there in time to put 
it out, before an hour. 

Sometimes you get into a—the old 
Riverside Hotel fire, for instance. An old 
wooden building with no fire stops, it was all 
afire, almost, in no time at all. The way the 
gases travel without fire stops is illustrated 
in a fire in a hotel in Chicago which I told 
about. And a large number of people, like 
thirty or forty, were killed in their rooms 
by these poisonous gases that came in over 
the top of the transom. And today, you don’t 
have a transom in a hotel over hotel doors 
because of that situation. That goes with 
wood construction and fire stopping, and 
so forth. 

Well, I’ve got into light steel construction 
and the fact that they began to make metal 
studs and they even make very light steel 
joists for residential construction. And then 


they have gotten into steel cables. First, they 
used steel cables to hang bridges. And now, 
they’re using steel cables in large building 
construction to hold roofs, and one of those 
is Dulles airport building in Washington. That 
roof is held by cables across the top. 

Reinforced concrete, they began to 
improve the mixing of concrete by having 
mixers. And the first mixers they had, they 
just turned them out any old way they 
happened to think was a good way, and they 
were fairly rapid mixers, and the result was 
that your materials—you know how your 
washing does in a [washing machine]. It’s 
right out against—hasn’t moved at all. No 
mixing goes on. It’s just plastered up against 
the outside. They went too fast, so they didn’t 
mix. So now, they have mixers, they specify 
how fast they may run on the peripheral. The 
bigger they are, of course, the slower they 
must go. They made mixers which made a 
very good mix of concrete. 

And then, they discovered that the more 
water you put in with concrete, the weaker 
it becomes. Everybody thought that you put 
water in so the concrete would go through the 
forms and just fill everything all up real good, 
and real easy, too. So they discovered that 
the strength of concrete is governed by the 
proportion of water to the cement you put in. 
It is governed by the ratio of the various sizes 
of rock that you put in. Now, if you have, in 
concrete, a lot of angular rock, crushed rock, 
and you just throw it together, why, one angle 
sticks out here, and another angle sticks in 
here, and they leave a hole, quite a large hole, 
between them. And they’re strong enough 
to maintain that under pressure. But if you 
have a rock that is an inch and a half in size 
all around— not a round rock, but a crushed 
rock—and you have some that are an inch 
and some that are three quarters [of an inch] 
and some that are a quarter, and then some 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


131 


sand that starts from an eighth down to very 
fine sand, you have materials that can flow 
into these holes between the big materials; 
smaller rocks get in and fill the holes with 
rock. A good mix, then, of concrete, is one 
in which there is just enough water with the 
cement to get the maximum strength. That is, 
the indicator of the strength of your concrete 
is the proportion of water to the cement. 

So you want the right proportion of water 
to get the maximum strength. But you also 
want the right proportion of water when 
everything is properly mixed so that this flows 
easily. And it will go into the forms and fill 
the corners and get all around the reinforcing 
steel. And in order to do that, then, they 
invented what they call a vibrator. That 
vibrator sticks in and it vibrates the concrete, 
and it shoves around into all corners and 
around all steel. Then by learning much about 
the grading of aggregates so that the various 
sizes of rock did fill the voids, they began to 
get a concrete that more nearly approximated 
the strength of the rocks. 

You know, rocks are very strong. They 
haven’t even approximated the strength of the 
rocks, actually, but they’re coming closer. They 
have finally gotten to a point now where they 
can turn out a concrete and the laboratory 
will take the materials that are available, local 
materials, the kind of rock you have to work 
with, and they’ll make a mix, and they’ll test 
it, and they’ll tell you how strong that mix is 
going to be. And then, they will agree to see 
that that is the mix that goes on every batch 
of concrete, that it will be that amount of 
the various sizes of rocks, and so forth. They 
have screens in the rock quarries, where they 
crush the rock, so that they actually separate 
the various sizes of rock that come through 
the crusher, and put them in piles. And they 
can put those rocks back together in any way 
you wish. 


So the design of concrete has become 
quite scientific and quite dependable. The 
design of the steel has also become uniform 
and dependable, and the science of putting 
these together on the job with your vibrators 
and with concrete crews who are accustomed 
to just that kind of work and have been 
trained to do the few little things necessary 
to be done by a human, you get excellent 
concrete work, and you can get concrete 
finishes that approximates a stone finish. 
You can use white cement, and you can get a 
finish that is beautiful on exterior concrete. 
You can also have all sorts of modeling on 
the exterior by building your forms , like of 
a photographic film, a reversal film. You can 
build forms so that you can have markings 
on the concrete, like joints, and all sorts of 
things. And concrete is, today, a very fine 
building material. 

Aluminum has come in from nothing to a 
material which is fine for exteriors on windows 
and doors. They’re trying to make aluminum 
structural materials now. They have been able 
to make alloys of aluminum that are fairly 
strong, which they didn’t have before. They 
can weld aluminum now, which they couldn’t 
do before. Aluminum is very stable. When you 
take some fine work like this over here ([sliding 
door] that’s aluminum), and you process it 
to fit into that opening and to have miter 
joints, and one thing and another, it makes a 
very beautiful finish. They can also treat the 
surface of aluminum now so that it won’t be 
stained. The original aluminum was a very 
shiny thing, and a little plaster on it would ruin 
the surface of it. They now anodize aluminum 
for permanence of its surface. And they make 
all kinds of things in aluminum. Cast iron is 
almost a thing of the past. They used to have a 
great deal of cast iron, cast iron bases for steel 
work and that sort of thing. Now they make 
that out of steel. So there’s aluminum. 



132 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Your plasters have come up not only 
with the usual gypsum plaster or the cement 
stucco, but now they have various kinds of 
plaster that are acoustical and have better 
fire prevention qualities. And they will dry 
quicker without shrinkage and cracking, and 
so forth. 

I’m not too familiar with the advances 
in plastering for the reason that plasterers 
have rather priced themselves out of the 
market. They—Well, for a while, when they 
were doing wood lath, for instance, they set 
a limit on the number of lath you could put 
up in a day as a union man. And they set a 
limit on the number of yards of plaster that 
you could put on in a day as a union man. So 
the big gypsum companies began to develop 
a gypsum board, and various other—Celotex, 
and various other types of wall coverings. The 
lumber industry, of course, has come up with 
their various kinds of plywoods and particle 
boards for wall coverings, with the result that 
plastering is done much less today than it was 
in my day. Plastering, one of its benefits was 
that it was a fire-resisting material. Tie can get 
by with the same fire-resisting characteristics 
in a building without the use of plaster. 

Electrical work, of course, we used to have 
heavy conduit, heavy steel conduit. And we 
had a lot of limited number of connections 
in boxes for conduit. We had wires, just very 
simple wires, single wires, not made up of 
strands. And wiring was a very simple job 
when we started. Today, they have developed 
lightweight conduits. They have developed 
flexible conduit. They have developed lead 
sheathing, and that sort of thing, on wires. 
And, of course, with the complexity of 
appliances and all that sort of thing, they 
have a wire for almost everything you want 
to do, and it’s a very complicated deal and not 
something for someone to mess with who isn’t 
a trained electrical engineer. 


The kinds of switches—we used to have 
just switches. Nowadays they have a switch 
that goes off, and you can set it, and it comes 
back on. Instead of a fuse, this switch, when 
your wire is overloaded, this switch just clicks 
out. And you go set it, and you’re back in 
business. Oh, I don’t know. I shouldn’t talk 
about electricity because it’s been so long 
since I had anything to do with electrical 
engineering that I’m no good. And the same 
thing is true with respect to heating and 
ventilating. 

You know, air conditioning used to be a 
very simple thing. And here [large book] is 
dope on air conditioning that—it’ll give you 
an idea. It’s full of charts and tables. And you 
have to know how to use them. [It] takes a 
man that is an expert to know how to use 
those things. So insofar as advances in heating 
and ventilating, I’ve mentioned them from 
time to time. 

Air conditioning has become almost 
a necessity. I was in the Harrah’s Hotel 
yesterday. And the air conditioning was off. 
And it was hotter than the hinges! It was very 
disagreeable. They finally got it fixed and got it 
on, but it took quite a while to get the building 
back to normal. We have air conditioning in 
our house here. The other day, it went off; 
the motor went out, and I want to tell you I 
wanted that fixed that day. I didn’t want to be 
in here without any air conditioning. They 
bought a new motor and put it in, the same 
day. 

So we have come to the point where 
people are accustomed to air conditioning 
and music. When you build a bank now, you 
put in public address with music all over the 
place. Girls can’t work without music any 
more, Kids can’t study without music. (I can’t 
study with it.) 

Materials—we have come into an age 
of plastics, and they are making all kinds of 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


133 


plastic materials, some for building. And for 
a while, they refused to let them put plastic 
materials in a building because, in the time 
of a fire, they made toxic gases. They are now 
making plastics that do not have those toxic 
gases and are acceptable for various things in 
building. Some is for surfaces. They’re making 
very hard plastics that won’t scar, practically. 
And plastics is coming more and more. 

I think there must be a—let me see 
[gets book] —chapter on plastics here in 
the building code. Now, this is a present day 
building code, about an inch and a quarter 
thick. It used to be half an inch thick in 1925, 
when this code was first put out. This code 
has, in addition, a book that goes with it, of 
standards, to tell you the materials which 
you simply specify by name in a code. This 
other book tells you that this material has 
been tested by the National Fire Underwriters 
Laboratories, and that its qualities are this, 
that, and the other thing. Its flame spread is 
something, its strength is something, and so 
forth. So it takes two rather large books in 
order to write a code. 

Now let’s see if they’ve got plastics in here. 
There’s plastic design and plastics approval 
and its area limitations, plastics for awnings 
and canopies, fastenings, glazing of openings, 
greenhouses, interior finish and trim, light 
fuses, monitors, sawtooth roofs, skylights, 
the structural requirements for plastics, even 
wall panels, exterior and interior. So plastics 
is a coming material which wasn’t even 
available when I started in business, wasn’t 
even dreamed of. They have a chapter, even, 
on plastic design. So your building code has 
recognized the importance of plastics and 
they’re available and used in buildings. 

Well, the nails today have increased from 
the ordinary square nail they used to have, 
which they drove with almost a single jack, to 
a terrific variety of nails. They have nails that 


are twisted spirally, they have nails that have 
barbs on them. They have all sorts of nails that 
cannot be pulled out, they hope. And there are 
nails for all different purposes. If you want to 
put a shake roof down, you need a special nail 
for that. Those nails can pull in a shake roof. 
They must be the proper length because some 
of these shakes are as much as three quarters 
of an inch thick. And at the base where they 
nail them, they could easily be half an inch 
thick. And your nail has got to go through 
and nail into the material below sufficiently 
to hold them, and then it should have some, 
oh, surface treatment that would keep it from 
pulling because these shake roofs will come 
off in great gobs. 

There was one case I was on, when a shake 
roof came off on a motel at Virginia city. And I 
had to testify as to whether or not it had been 
properly put on. And, of course, the minute 
you say something, why, the attorney says, “Of 
course, that’s your opinion. Now, how do you 
substantiate that?” Now, I never tested any 
shakes to see whether they were going to stay 
or not, but I know what I should do to put up 
a good shake roof that will remain, and what 
slopes they must go on. 

So nails, the size of nails is myriad, you 
might say, from the very small brads up to 
great spikes a foot long. And the types of 
nails are—well, there’s almost an uncounted 
number of types of nails, in all different 
countries, too. They have surface treatments 
of one kind and another to keep them from 
being pulled. They have various kinds of 
heads, various kinds of points. And in form 
work, nails have two heads so that you can 
drive the first head right up solid against the 
material. But when you want to take the form 
down, the second head, you can put your 
hammer under and pull it. So nails, in shape, 
size, and form have been developed in great 
number. The strength of nailed constructions 



134 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


has been set forth by the Department of 
Commerce in a publication covering all 
fastenings for woodwork. And the strength 
of nails driven into side grain, driven into 
end grain against a sheer—that is, against 
pulling—the nail is driven in sideways, and 
the movement tends to be vertical, then this 
is sheer [perpendicular]. The nail will hold 
so much that way. If it is nailed into the side 
grain and there’s a tendency to pull away, then, 
that’s a different strength. How strong is it to 
keep from being pulled out? If it is driven 
into the end grain of the wood, this is, again, 
a different strength. 

And then they make timber connectors 
in which they have a sort of a washer with a 
ridge that sets into a mortise in the wood. And 
then a bolt goes through and holds it there. 
And they connect wood materials with these 
timber connectors. But the nailings are all set 
by test. And the number of nails to give you a 
certain strength, you can figure, but you must 
drive nails far enough apart so that they don’t 
split the wood that you’re working with. 

So nailing isn’t just a simple matter of 
putting down a nail and hammering it in. 
You have to know what you’re doing. So, as I 
say, nails are almost of infinite variety, and it’s 
not something for some carpenter to decide 
two nails is enough. It should be designed by 
someone who understands the strength and 
the types, the qualifications, the properties, of 
nails. To architects, they send out a cardboard 
about eighteen inches by twenty-four inches 
on which there will be perhaps twenty to 
thirty types of nails made by one company! 

I’ve got to go back now to that brick again, 
to tell you that most of the ornamental work 
that was done on the exterior of buildings 
when they were of brick was terra-cotta. 
The terra-cotta was polychrome. They could 
make it in all sorts of colors. You could make 
almost any kind of a design and color it any 


way you wished. There were two concerns on 
the coast that did it, N. Clark and Sons and 
Gladding, McBean Now, N. Clark and Sons 
went broke because it was too expensive to 
use terra-cotta, finally. Gladding, McBean 
went into all kinds of conduits and sewer pipe, 
and things of that sort, that were in demand, 
and they stayed competitive, and they’re still 
in business today. 

Oh, by the way, ! mentioned this before. 
Going back to the use of brick and the 
availability of the workmen (this was in the 
’20’s—oh, in the early century, from 1900 to 
1920), they would do lots of cut brickwork 
and lots of bond, different bonds—English 
bonds, Flemish bonds, running bond, that 
sort of thing. And the example, the existing 
example of the kind of brickwork it was 
possible to do is the Cladianos building. 

And glass, also; they began to make 
structural glass, and exterior walls of buildings 
were covered with this structural glass in a 
sandwich with insulation back of the glass, 
and then a Lacer on the opposite side of the 
insulation for room finish. A great many 
very high buildings were done with this type 
of material. One of its advantages was its 
lightness and the fact that you didn’t have 
to have such heavy steel in the structural 
portions of the building. 

They can actually create—if you happen 
to have asthma, for instance, they can put air 
conditioning and filters, and so forth, into 
your house that will give you no dust and will 
give you no bugs and give you no pollen. It’s a 
little expensive to take care of all those things, 
hut they can do it. So air conditioning came 
to the point where they could give you air 
of an exact weight, hold just so much water, 
and was completely free of all sorts of allergic 
materials, materials that created allergies. And 
that, today, in the big buildings means that you 
can walk through the air ducts that bring air 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


135 


to portions of the building, the mains, from 
which branches are taken to various portions. 
You can walk through them standing up. And 
the fans are, similarly, very large, and they 
have tremendous compressors to take care 
of their freon. It’s just big equipment. And it 
takes a lot of room to take care of it. 

The electrical work has developed now 
to the point where if you know which push 
button to stick your thumb on, you can do 
just about anything you want to by pushing a 
button. Everything is automatic. In the field of 
communications, why, that has developed to 
an astounding point—public address systems, 
that sort of thing, and telephones, all sorts of 
wire transmission, radar transmission. In a 
building, you can have intercommunications 
of all important parts of the building, and all 
at the pushing of a button. You can start your 
equipment at the pushing of a button. And 
they have now developed switching systems, 
so that when you push the button, you are 
only pushing a line that carries six volts. But 
this small amount of power gets to the switch 
that you want to burn, and it operates the 
relay, which then throws real power into the 
operating equipment. And the switch can be 
thrown, or taken off. But you are in no danger 
because there’s high voltage, of getting it when 
you press one of those buttons, because it only 
[laughing] has six volts. 

Hardware has developed tremendously 
over the years. There’s a lot of copying in 
hardware. They make a piece of hardware that 
looks like the original article, but it doesn’t 
have the character of springs; it doesn’t have 
the parts; it will wear, whereas the original 
article has a metal material that will stand up 
for years and years and years. And they’ll use 
cheaper metals and cheapen that thing. But it 
looks like the original. And they give it a name 
almost like the original. Then you specify that 
hardware. And the bids come in. And this 


man, with the make-believe hardware, is low. 
And he ships in the stuff, and it doesn’t have 
exactly the name. And if you aren’t careful, 
why, you’ll accept it and put it in a building, 
and he’s made his profit and beaten a good 
man out of a job, and you get your head beat in 
when the stuff goes to pot. That’s particularly 
true with Schlage hardware, which is a very 
fine hardware for door locks, and all that sort 
of thing. And there was, and still is, for all I 
know, a firm who makes a similar lock which 
is not comparable, actually, and cheaper. 

[What part do labor unions play in their 
effect on me and on my profession?] The labor 
unions can give you a lot of trouble. If you 
don’t design your building with a view to the 
skilled mechanics of the various trades that 
are available, in your area and to your area, 
the next thing you know, somebody is going 
to try to do two things. It’s hard to get the men 
up to handle a certain part of a job; they may 
try to do it themselves. And right then, right 
now, your job is shut down. You’ve got a big 
argument. These business agents for unions, 
their job is to see that their union people get 
every bit of the kind of work they handle that’s 
done in their area. Nobody else gets to touch 
it. And if anybody does touch it, it’s their job 
to see they never do it again. So these business 
agents are apt to be right on your neck the 
minute you touch anything that isn’t part of 
your trade union rules and regulations. 

They also have jurisdictional disputes 
(I think I mentioned this) where you have 
a door, and it’s a wooden door, and there’s 
a wooden jamb, and there are steel studs up 
against the jamb, and there’s metal lath and 
plaster coming up against the jamb, and all 
of a sudden you have three trades involved. 
And if one of them does any part of the other 
one’s work, if one of them doesn’t do a good 
job of putting in steel studs, and the carpenter 
shoves them up against his woodwork and 



136 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


fastens them, right away, you are up against 
some kind of a dispute. And often, it is 
wise, in designing the building, to take up 
some section where there could possibly 
be a jurisdictional dispute, which union is 
going to handle this work, as I told you, for 
instance, in some acoustical work, when the 
plasterers wanted it, the painters wanted it, 
and the asbestos workers did it. That’s the 
jurisdiction—who has jurisdiction over the 
application of materials. Frequently, you can 
go to the union headquarters and discuss [it] 
with the two or three union heads involved 
and get a solution that will keep things sweet. 
If they’re not mad at one another at that time, 
they frequently cooperate. 

But I tell you, some of these—their job, 
also, is to get more money, more vacation pay, 
more sick pay, and less hours of work for their 
unions. Wow, the plumbers, for instance, they 
claim plumbing is an art. And I want to tell 
you, they get the salary of an artist! They’ve 
really got themselves up, seven dollars and a 
half an hour, plus I don’t know what all fringe 
benefits. And it is coming to the point now 
where everybody is looking for some way 
to cut down on the use of these highly paid 
mechanics. 

Now, the plasterers—when fire protection 
began to be quite important and the codes 
were changing, the plasterers thought they 
had it made because they could put on their 
plaster and metal lath and they had one-hour 
fire protection. But as they began to price 
themselves out of the market, the gypsum 
industry came along with the gypsum board, 
and the next thing you know, you have a fire 
prevention, a fire-safe application which is 
in one big board, four by twelve, four feet 
by twelve feet, and you put it up with clips. 
And no plasterer can do that; that’s a lather’s 
work. And they can paint over that. They 
don’t have to put anything on it. So first, the 


gypsum board came along as a lath, which 
was put on by the lathers in large sheets. And 
it only took about five eighths of an inch of 
plaster, where metal lath and plaster takes 
three quarters, as a minimum—seven eighths 
thickness, all told. Then they began to make 
this gypsum board with surfaces such that 
you could paint them, decorate them, and 
that was your finished surface. When they 
first did that, that surface was so soft that you 
could run a piece of furniture against it and 
leave a bad dent. Today they have a gypsum 
board that will take quite a fair beating and 
stay in pretty good shape. And, of course, it 
does give you the fire protection that you’re 
required to have. 

So the unions have done great things for 
their people, and rightfully so. They gave 
gotten them living wages with the chance of 
saving some money, enough money to raise 
families, and that sort of thing, in these days 
of—whatever you call it— inflation. But, of 
course, it’s like the pendulum. It swings over 
and back. In many cases, they’ve gone too far. 
But they have done a very necessary job, if you 
want to have skilled mechanics. 

There’s another thing, of course, in the 
unions. They have a number of people in each 
union who are past the age of giving first-class 
work. They carry them along in the union just 
the same. They do not retire them, because if 
they retire them, that has to come out of the 
union fund. So they can then assign them to 
the easier jobs that come along and to people 
they don’t like. People who have fought the 
unions may get from the unions a couple of 
fellows that aren’t very good at their job, or 
very fast, either. And there’s nothing you can 
do about that. Bruce Thompson tried to do it, 
I know. He did make a little progress. 

But in general, the unions have been, I 
think, a good thing for the working man, 
where the? haven’t gone all out, like with the 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


137 


plumbers. The plumbers are way out of line. 
I can remember when the hod carriers had 
a union. And immediately, they hadn’t any 
sooner than formed the union than they went 
on strike for a lot more money. That’s the 
reason they formed the union, not because 
they thought there were any other benefits. 
They thought they were going to increase their 
wages, they went on strike, and that meant, of 
course, that the brick masons couldn’t work. 
Because once you have a union to carry hods, 
nobody but that kind of a union’s going to 
carry them. The brick masons couldn’t say, 
“Well, we’ll carry our own hods,” because 
then they’d pull the whole job. Everybody’d 
quit. Put up pickets, and you’re dead. So the 
brick masons simply said to the hod carriers, 
“Look, buster! You go back to work real soon, 
like, say, eight o’clock tomorrow morning, 
or you aren’t going to be carrying any hods”. 
And that’s what happened. They went back 
[laughing] to work. But they did, later on, 
get quite a lot more money. A hod carrier has 
almost tripled his money, I think. It’s a very 
hard work, and it needs no special skills, just 
good help and a strong body. 

But as I say, I think the unions have done 
a good job in the majority of their activities. 
And now, of course, they have great war 
chests, and they’ve messed into politics, and 
they’re interfering in the civic life of the white 
collar people quite a bit. It boils down to this, 
as I see it, that there’s so much money in the 
pot in this country, and so many workers 
to split it up. Now, if the unions, who have 
perhaps 20,000,000 members in all unions all 
together Cl don’t know what the population is 
now, hut that’s a good guess), if they’re getting 
a much larger part of that pot, it’s not there for 
the white collar workers to get it. And also, 
the white collar workers are not organized. 
And we’ll say there’s 20,000,000 union people, 
60,000,000 white workers. It may be more; I 


don’t know. The white collar men, then, go 
in with their hat in their hand and ask for a 
raise. The union man goes in and says, “We 
want a raise, and if we don’t get it, you’re dead, 
your operation stops.” And sometimes there’s 
a compromise, and sometimes they get what 
they ask for. 

But if the white collar workers were to 
be organized, 60,000,000 of them, into one 
union, you can imagine what the musclemen 
of unionism would do. They’d be in there 
fighting, shooting, killing one another, trying 
to get control of the 60,000,000 people for 
a dollar a week, or whatever it might be— 
tremendous amount of money involved, a 
tremendous job involved with a tremendous 
salary. So whether it is good to have them all 
organized or not [laughing], this is a moot 
question I’m not prepared to even discuss. 

[What’s the architect’s role in dealing with 
the various unions?] The architect has no role, 
other than, as I have told you, to recognize 
what can happen as he designs a building, and 
then, if he sees fit, to go and say, “I have this 
job coming up and I have to do thus and so. 
Will I run into union trouble, and if so, how 
can I avoid it in the design of the building?” 
That’s all. He is just a go-between, that’s all. 

I had the best of luck. I went down to the 
union headquarters, and [Harry] De Paoli, 
I believe, was a president of the state union 
setup. I don’t know what they called it, now. 
And I’d go to Dc Paoli and say, “I have a thing 
here that might develop into some kind of 
trouble. Can you help me with it? Is there 
something I can do to improve the situation?” 

And De Paoli’d say, “Well, let’s see who’s 
involved,” and he’d call them in, the business 
agents, and we’d sit down, and sometimes 
you’d get an absolute, “No, by God. Bla bla 
bla.” But in general, there was cooperation. 
They’d say, “Well, if you do it this way, it’ll 
be all right.” Or some business agent will say, 



138 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


“I’d like to let you do it, but my gang would 
just raise hell. I can’t afford to do it.” He’s got 
a job to protect, you see. But you get as much 
cooperation from them as is possible because 
they don’t like to go on strike, either. They like 
to get what they want without any trouble at 
all [laughing]. And I’m giving them a chance 
to get what they want without having any 
trouble if they will cooperate with me and I 
with them in the design of the building. So 
that’s about the only role an architect can have. 

I did have a role in the construction of 
the First National Bank building, when the 
contractor put up one elevator. That’s the 
exterior elevator that they use for construction 
purposes, lot of pipes. You’ve seen them. And 
the plasterer decided that he was going to mix 
his plaster on the ground and take it up in 
wheelbarrows on the elevator. 

Well, when he got on the job and started 
plastering and his boys were waiting almost 
for every elevator to shove a couple or three 
wheelbarrows of plaster on there, the other 
subcontractors, “7h0 wanted to take up 
lighting fixtures or gyp board or lath, and 
various things they had to do in their business, 
found themselves without an elevator in a 
sixteen story building. And there was a real 
row which developed in that they were just 
about to stop all construction ’till we found 
out what we were going to do with that. What 
they wanted the plasterer to do was to mix his 
plaster on one floor (we’ll say, the sixth floor 
or the seventh floor) and put in a big pump, 
and pump the plaster up four or five floors 
and pump it down four or five floors, which 
is a normal way of doing it, but a little more 
expensive than using the wheelbarrows and 
unskilled labor. It finally worked out that he 
mixed his plaster, and so forth, in the middle 
of the building [a] couple of places, and that 
he—I’ve forgotten—he didn’t put in a pump. 
And also, they worked, they ran the elevator 


on Saturday to let a lot of subcontractors get 
materials up for the next week, arid unload 
them at the various floors where they were 
to use them. 

But I was in that discussion because I 
knew almost all of the union people involved 
well and favorably, and all I did was sit in 
there as a sort of a catalyst. I could say, “Why 
don’t you help him,” or what have you. That’s 
about all. But that was my involvement there. 
And we did work out a satisfactory—wasn’t 
satisfactory, but we worked out a use of that 
elevator that the contractor would go for 
(because it cost hint quite a little extra money, 
too) and that the subcontractors could live 
with, although it did cost them a little money; 
it cost everybody a little money. But they 
wanted to make damn sure that everybody 
had to spend as much as they did [laughing]. 

So that, as far as I know, is the architect’s 
involvement with unions. He’s not very 
important in any way. 

Well, let’s see. What have I missed in 
materials of construction? One thing I haven’t 
covered is the great amount of prefabrication 
that is being done in connection with 
buildings, building portions of the buildings 
such that they can be fitted together on the 
site. And this is much more economical than 
shipping them all, knocked down, to the site 
and taking whatever labor is available and 
trying to put it together. You’re working in 
your plant with skilled mechanics who do that 
all the time, and also with equipment which 
is designed to accomplish only one purpose, 
and that’s your particular equipment. So that 
has come to pass, and, of course, duplication 
as much as possible in structure. 

So, as I say, architecture has changed 
during my career. The styling and design 
have changed almost from log cabin to early 
computer [laughing]. They do a great deal 
of building with the assistance of computers 



Commentary on Changes of Architecture, 1920 -1970; Changes in Building Materials 


139 


now. And an architect today has to have so 
many skills that one small head just can’t hold 
’em all. And I bet if you were to program a 
computer to produce an architect, it’d come 
out with three men. There’s just no chance of 
one man being an expert in all of the materials 
of construction and in the methods, and that 
sort of thing, that are in use today. 

I’ve done all of it. I’ve done all of it; there 
hasn’t been a question of adaptation. It’s 
been a pleasure. It’s been wonderful to have 
these things come along. They’re a great help. 
In addition to this, don’t forget that these 
companies are manufacturing materials with 
the idea of shipping into the job and letting 
them be installed. This is, in effect, a lot of 
prefabrication, too. Their instructions are 
complete. When you get the materials of one 
kind or another, you have instructions that tell 
you exactly what to do. Frequently, they will 
send out men from their factory and inspect 
what you have done. And if you’ve made a 
mistake, they pick it up for you. Oh, there’s no 
adaptation to these things. We look forward 
to them. They’ve made our work easier, and 
they made our buildings better. They also 
gave our clients a much more flexible building 
for their purpose, which helped us, too, in 
addition to which, it shot a lot of designers 
and contractors out of our business because 
they couldn’t make the grade. They weren’t 
up to date. 

One of the things that we more and more 
had to know about was the market, what 
is being made and sold. And is it available 
here? And if so, how long does it take to get 
it? And will they service it here? Now, service, 
today, is a particularly valuable thing with the 
kind of equipment you have today, because 
if something goes wrong with a particularly 
complicated piece of equipment that weighs 
about forty tons and costs [laughing] $100,000, 
who’s going to walk up there and say, “This is 


what was wrong, or that’s what was wrong.” 
You need a man from the factory who knows. 
So if that service isn’t available, such as buying 
a lot of equipment that’s manufactured in New 
York and having it shipped out here and put 
in buildings out here, then getting into some 
trouble which New York decides it was your 
fault anyway because you’re so dumb about 
their equipment, and they aren’t going to 
spend any money coming out because it was 
your fault, that don’t do you a bit of good. 
But if you have people in Sacramento, and 
your equipment needs service, why, they can 
protect their reputation and their equipment 
for a very small price. And they send people 
out as fast as they can to make sure that you 
get first-class service. 




13 


Summary of Architectural Career 


Well, this morning we were going to talk 
about three architects. And I can’t think of 
anything too interesting. When I started 
practice, of course, I have told you that I was 
not registered, and there was no regulation 
of the practice of architecture in the state 
of Nevada. People thought that contractors 
built buildings and the architect was a sort 
of window dressing; he was not a necessity 
at all. Also, I could do my own structural 
engineering. Today, you must have a structural 
engineer whose “registered” seal goes on 
your drawings. I did my own heating and 
ventilating because it was largely a question 
of buying a floor furnace, for instance, that 
said it’ll heat five rooms, and so you bought 
a floor furnace and put it in. and there was 
your heat. If the kids were warm enough on 
he floor, you had headaches because the heat 
was so hot at your head height. Then we came 
to one-pipe steam jobs, and we also came 
to one-pipe water jobs with radiation. And 
that was simple to design. In those days, a 
lot of technicalities that are now taken care 


of are bypassed. You got by with what was 
done at the time. It was customary, routine 
design at the time, and you got by with it, 
and you thought it was pretty good because 
it was better than anything you’d had before. 
And then, of course, you came to two-pipe 
steam with a vacuum pump to bring back the 
condensate to the broiler so that it couldn’t 
run out of water. And gradually they began 
to come into air heat by ducts, by a means of 
ducts and fans. And this led, of course, to air 
conditioning. And rather rapidly, at that time, 
which I should say was about 1945, heating 
ventilating just got completely out of hand, 
as far as any layman who could sit down 
formerly and get by with what was usually 
done in his area. He wasn’t competent to do 
that work anymore, so heating and ventilating 
engineers came to the fore, and they, also, had 
to be registered. 

The architect, then—as these things came 
along and became more complicated, the 
contractor found that the buildings he was 
putting up without this special help were not 



142 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


doing the job, and people were dissatisfied. 
So the architect began, then, to become more 
and more to the fore. 

When I did the State Building (that was 
where the Pioneer Theater is now), I did my 
own structural engineering for that building. 
But my heating and ventilating was outside of 
my ken, and I had to have a specialist do that 
for me. So there was one of the first breaks in 
the practice of architecture, when you were 
able to do almost everything yourself. 

Inspection of the architects work—when 
I started, inspection was a rather minor part 
of your work because there was just one 
way of doing things; there were just certain 
mechanics that could do things in your 
area, and that’s the way it was going to be 
done. And there was also some pride among 
mechanics and workmen and contractors in 
doing a reasonably good job. Men like Joe 
Dillard would do a good job if it cost them 
money. If they lost some of their profit and 
some of their own cash, they’d do a good 
job in spite of anything. We don’t have 
contractors like that anymore. They’ve come 
to the point where, to do a good job, it’s 
costing them money, and they immediately 
want an “extra”. They have a different 
attitude, that they feel that the public thinks 
the contractor should give them a bid on 
some work to be done and then he should 
do the job, and they do not provide him with 
a complete set of plans and specifications of 
what they want and how they want it done. 
So they sort of think they can go through 
the job and make up their minds later. After 
the man has said it’s going to cost so much, 
they can put something in, and it’ll cost him 
$10,000 more, and they expect him to do it. 
But today, they don’t do those things. And 
you make a change like that, the contractor’s 
so tight that you have to pay for it. Somebody 
has to pay for it, or they don’t do it. 


Well, there was this first break when I 
couldn’t do heating and ventilating but could 
still do structural work. In that building that 
I had just discussed [State Building], the 
acoustics were so bad that it was very hard 
to hear. And we had not at that time—now, 
I’ve forgotten when that building was built 
, to tell you the truth; I think [it was] about 
1927. it cost $210,000,1 remember. Oh, maybe 
it was $200—anyhow, what’s the difference. 
$210,000. and we didn’t have acoustics as a 
science. And we didn’t think too much about 
it. So here’s this big hall we put up there with 
it’s balcony going way back up into the top of 
the building, and it was very hard t hear and 
understand anything that was said. The reason 
for that—I think I’ve explained acoustics 
before, how it bounces around and your ears 
keep hearing it for a fraction of a second, 
enough to fuzz it up. 

So the ultimate thing—while I’m discussing 
that—the ultimate that happened was that 
some years later, the county commissioners 
asked me to correct the building acoustically. 
Now, if that was ’27, this must’ve been six or 
seven years later, anyhow. I think I told you 
about this, where the various trades came in 
and were going to do the job. The outstanding 
people in acoustic work at that time were 
in the Western Asbestos Company of San 
Francisco. So in order to do this job, I had to 
get them to tell me how to do it and what to do 
and how much to do. And then they sent their 
crew up, as I have told you to do the job. This 
was the first acoustical correction that I did, 
and I think it was about the time that people 
began to think in terms of better hearing in 
public assembly rooms. So the architect, now, 
has gotten to the place where he is beginning 
to need consultants in the realm of heating, 
in ventilating, and in acoustics. 

I almost forget to tell you that I also did my 
electrical work. When I first started out, I was 



Summary of Architectural Career 


143 


taking electrical engineering at the University. 
But electric work got way out of hand very 
rapidly. All kinds of gimmicks came in. We 
have today the gimmick of touch plates that 
operate on very low voltage. You couldn’t get 
a shock out of them to save your soul. And the 
switches are thrown by coils, wire coils, that 
are activated by this touch plate system at six 
volts or twelve volts, which releases 110 volts 
of power into the coil that throws the switch. 
And this is elaborated and elaborated on until 
one push button can put a whole building into 
operation, if it’s properly wired. And electric 
wiring is very complicated. And the wiring of 
controls in a building has come to the point 
where the electrical contractor frequently 
can’t do it. He has to have a specialist do that 
wiring of controls. Because [if] you get a 
control fuzzed up, even one control, this may 
affect four or five controls. It might even have 
your motors reversed, blowing air in instead 
of out. So that, again, we came to the point 
where we needed a consultant. Now, this, we’ll 
say is around 1930, [that] I’ve gotten to, with 
this condition existing. 

It’s when I did the—1928, I guess, when 
I did the high school in Vegas. At that high 
school, I had an electrical engineer for it, and 
I had a heating engineer to do the heating for 
it. I did the structural, still, for the Las Vegas 
High School. And the inspection for the Las 
Vegas High School was beginning, then, to 
get a little rough. Now, I told you about the 
inspection that they started. This was the 
beginning, in Las Vegas (and about the same 
time Reno had approximately the same thing), 
beginning of city inspection of work. And, of 
course, they didn’t have real inspectors. They 
had just started with somebody, probably. 
And they had an inspection job, and they got 
revenue for it. The depression, then, of course, 
came along, and architects were working with 
anything they could get, a lot of them, because 


business was certainly curtailed to the point 
where nothing was done. 

I’ll tell you about cooper’s apartment. 
Cooper, he was the mayor of Reno, and he had 
an apartment house over on Hill Street and 
another one of those corners over in there, 
and he wanted to make five apartments out 
of it. He had some money. His money was in 
a bank in San Francisco, although he was the 
director of the Washoe County Bank, which 
went ka-flop. But all of his dough was in a 
big bank in San Francisco. And so when he 
started to do this apartment, we made five 
apartments out of this home of his. And Joe 
Dillard did the job. And Cooper went down 
every Friday and picked up the money he 
needed to give Joe Dillard the pay for his help, 
brought it back. Saturday was pay day. They 
worked eight full hours, six days a week, and 
they worked for three dollars a day, and there 
was a line of men. Fifteen, twenty men were 
there. And they got in a line because nobody 
was going to let anybody get ahead of him if 
there was a chance at a job. Even a laborer’s 
job. He was going to be where he was when he 
got there. They lined up. Joe built that job for 
almost nothing. [In] comparison with prices 
today, it was nothing. And I was the architect 
for the job. That’s one of the very few jobs I 
had during the Depression. 

Well, anyhow, when the banks went broke, 
I had no money, and I had used up most of 
my money paying office rent. I gradually quit 
subscribing to magazines, and what have 
you, hanging on, and I finally went out and 
got a job. And I’ve told you about that. That 
terminated in the highway department, when 
the building inspection in Reno, with the 
starting to practice architecture again, and 
being back fully practicing architecture in 
1945, whish had ended, also, a great deal of my 
active participation in the uniform Building 
Code organization. In 1945,1 took a two years 



144 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


leave of absence from the building inspection 
work, and just did architectural work. And by 
the end of the two years, Lord, my architecture 
practice was booming very nicely, and I didn’t 
want anything else. 

But at that time, I began to get larger 
buildings. Buildings have kept increasing 
in size and in complexity and in height, 
particularly in height, because the cost of the 
ground kept going up. And if you were going 
to pay the extra cost of the ground, you had to 
have more building to rent to help pay for it. 
And then, too, the population was increasing, 
markets were increasing in size, and the size 
and complexity of the suppliers in this area 
was greater and greater. 

And about this time, too, that—well it 
was just before this time that I, as a member 
of the Planning Commission, tried to get 
them to set aside industrial ground to bring 
industry to Reno. 

Well, 1945. In 1947, the school board 
called me in and asked me to do Reno High 
School. They had $1,000,000 to do it, and 
when we outlined their plans—or I outlined 
their plans for it, I told them that they had 
a job which would take anywhere from $3,- 
$4,000,000. They laughed at me and cited 
a school in Utah which had been built for 
$1,000,000 and which included most of 
the things they wanted in this new school. 
However, these were reasonable people. You 
could prove your point. And when you did, 
they would accept it. And I proved my point. 
But I also found that I had a $4,000,000 school 
to do and a deadline to meet doing it. And I 
had no draftsmen. I was still the architect who 
was doing most of his work himself. And it 
was at this point that Graham Erskine came to 
Reno for a divorce, and called me up to see if I 
needed anyone to work. So I talked to him and 
found that he had a doctorate in architecture 
from the University of Rome at Perugia. He 


had worked for a very large firm in New York 
City and had quite a bit of experience. And he 
was just what I needed. So I took Graham to 
work and I got a couple of other boys to work 
at that time, then, I wrote the specifications for 
the high school, all of them, something that I 
can’t do today. Graham took care of most of 
the work in the drawings with the draftsmen 
that we hired. 

It was then that we began to see some of 
the complexities that had arisen gradually 
around the country (and Reno was a little 
behind because this is a small place), and 
found out the amount of work we were going 
to have to do and the fee that we were going to 
have to get to pay for it. We couldn’t pay for it 
on the fees we were getting. They were doing 
schools for five percent in California, and this 
board thought I should do that school for five 
percent here. And I refused. I told them that 
I had to have eight percent, or no dice. (Not 
just that way, but this was how it had to be.) 
I had to have eight percent, because at that 
time, the structural engineers (and I had to 
hire a structural engineer) were charging two 
percent of the cost of the building for their 
work. And I had hired Hal Engle, a graduate of 
the University of Nevada and of a university in 
Stockholm, Sweden, with a master’s degree in 
structural engineering. I had hired him as my 
structural engineer, and he had a two percent 
fee. We also found that in a building the size 
of this high school—and you understand that 
the Reno High School my father had built 
in 1910 was still the high school in 1945, 
and completely inadequate in staff and in 
curriculum and size—in every way. 

So suddenly, we have a building, a rather 
complex operation to put into a building. 

Well, as a result of that high school job, 
and this being the first experience with a 
rather large and a complicated project that I 
had had, I realized that I couldn’t any more 



Summary of Architectural Career 


145 


handle these entire jobs, that I had to have 
one of two things. I either had to have a larger 
office with some extra people in it, or I had 
to have a partner. If I had a larger office with 
expert people, I had to continue with jobs of 
that size, and they weren’t available, If I had a 
partner, he’d have to take the ups and downs 
along with me. So at that time, I gave Graham 
Erskine a junior partnership with inc. And we 
were able, then, to—I then specialized more 
in inspection. 

And getting back to this inspection, 
as these buildings became more and more 
complicated, and as heating, ventilating, 
electrical work, air conditioning, structural 
also became more complicated and of greater 
size and importance, it became necessary that 
inspection be provided for all of these various 
departments of the building, and provided 
at the time when you could see what was 
happening before a contractor got it built 
and then said, “What am I going to do? It’s 
all done. Why didn’t you stop me before? If 
you want it changed, you’ll have to pay for 
it.” This is the sort of thing that you would 
run into. So this inspection began to be more 
and more important. And as time has gone 
on, inspection has now come to the point 
where an architect who provides a material 
with certain manufacturer’s guarantees, 
which does not perform according to the 
manufacturer’s guarantees, has been held 
liable to have tested that material to see if 
it would do what the manufacturer said it 
would do. This has thrown quite a kink into 
the practice of architecture. Some architects 
have gone broke. 

The change in costs—that is to say, the 
unions who more and more are breaking 
down the construction practices so that this 
union does a smaller and smaller part of 
the work, the next union does everything, 
and that line between them is never crossed 


without trouble. You don’t pick up—I picked 
up a bender, a conduit bender in Harold’s 
Club at the request of an electrician who 
said, “Would you take it down and give it to 
the guy downstairs?” I picked it up and took 
it downstairs, and fifteen minutes later, the 
business agent was in there wanting to know 
what in the heck I was doing handling tools. 
And he was going to pull this job if it ever 
happened again, just threw his weight around. 

Well, this cane to the point where I 
remember on the Reno High School where 
I had (and I told you about this)—the doors 
were wooden, the frames were steel, the metal 
lath was steel, and the plaster. Well, there 
were three trades involved in a door. And 
how to put them together without getting one 
jurisdiction mad at another one was a little bit 
of a problem, so I went down and settled it 
with the unions before the job was done and 
while 32 was designing. And they accepted, 
“We’ll do it this way,” and that’s the way I 
designed it. And we had no trouble. 

But these jurisdictional disputes, that is, 
what union has jurisdiction over what kind 
of work and tools and the teamsters bringing 
stuff just so far and somebody else unloading 
it, or what have you, all these things have 
tended to raise prices to the point where 
architects, on some jobs where there was 
a considerable amount of tension between 
unions, found that the price had to be raised 
very considerably, and his estimate was no 
good. Now an architect comes up with an 
estimate, and there is a budget. We’ll say the 
budget was a million dollars; the architect’s 
estimate’s a million dollars, and the bid price 
comes at $1,200,000. And the owner says 
to the architect, “How come? I don’t have 
that $200,000. I can’t borrow it at a bank. I 
borrowed everything I can borrow.” That’s 
what he’s going to tell you, even if he could 
borrow a half a million at the bank. 



146 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


And you try to find out what comes, and 
you find out the contractor says, “Well, look. 
I couldn’t take a chance on this. When I got 
my costs all together, I had to put five percent 
on that part of the job. And da de da and da 
de da and da de da,” The next thing you know, 
he’s got quite a few little percentages that he 
added to take care of expenses which he was 
afraid might happen. 

In some cases in this area, architects 
who have a reputation for being particularly 
unreasonable and demanding and arbitrary, 
contractors add to their overall cost to take 
care of expected costs that they’ll run into 
when this architect gets throwing his weight 
around. The other day, a contractor who 
was bidding on flooring for a job said, “This 
is so-and-so’s job, and,” he says, “I just put 
ten percent on my estimate when I got all 
through.” 

I said, “on how much of your estimate?” 

He said, “On the profit, the overhead, the 
cost. I put ten percent on my total estimate. 
And,” he said, “I just might need it.” He said, 
“If I don’t need it, I’ve got a hell of a good job.” 
[laughing) 

Now, that’s an attitude that you run up 
against. And the architect who is $200,000 
over runs the risk, if he can’t get that job 
down satisfactory to the owner and within a 
million dollars, of losing his entire fee, and 
then maybe being sued besides. More and 
more architects are getting sued, so that it 
now becomes a good thing to do to hire, for 
a quarter of a percent, I believe it is, a firm to 
make an estimate of the cost of your structure. 
And this we are doing, for instance, with the 
legislative building, and We’re doing it with 
the educational building at the University. 
These people will take off the materials, and 
they will give you a broken-down estimate 
which you can see for yourself, how much 
material. And they’ll be right with the 


materials. Then they have the prices; they 
have the right prices for people in this area. 
You can take those estimates and check with 
contractor friends and say, “Would you use 
this price?” 

And he may say, “Yes,” or he may say, 
“Well, now, there’s a little thing this guy didn’t 
know, and I have to get more than that.’ So 
that you come to the point where you have a 
fairly close estimate of the cost of this project 
that you’re designing before it goes to bid with 
contractors. 

You then say, “This is very close. The 
budget’s a million. My estimate’s a million. I 
can’t go with that,” So you put the job out with 
some sections of it as additive bids. And so you 
put out what you are sure will be a $900,000 
base bid. That is, the lowest possible bid you 
could get with these things cut out would be 
$900,000 according to your estimate. So you 
have eleven percent of leeway to take care of 
these things the contractors might do. 

Now, if they come in with a $900,000 bid, 
then the additives, they’ve also bid on these 
various additives that bring it right up to snuff. 
Each one, they’ll add so much if they do that 
much more work. So then, if you can get all 
those additives in for your million dollars, 
fine, you do. And if you can’t, you take those 
additives that your owner wants you to take to 
keep within the money. And then if he wants 
to raise some more money and go and do the 
rest of it, okay. You don’t have to put it up. 
You get out of line, he wants you to put it up. 

So this thing we also have to do today: 
we have to get experts to give us an estimate 
of cost in order to protect ourselves. We 
have to carry insurance on ourselves. If we 
have inspectors in the field, the insurance on 
their work is the same as the highest cost of 
insurance for labor with the Nevada Industrial 
Commission. And they come in, check our 
books, and they want that insurance. We have 



Summary of Architectural Career 


147 


other various sorts of insurance we have to 
carry nowadays, we must carry insurance, 
health insurance and accident insurance, 
for our employees. We have to pay for our 
employees’ Social Security, and we have to 
pay unemployment compensation, We have 
to pay that. So we have the Nevada Industrial 
Commission. We have our own health 
insurance projects. And another thing we 
have to do, if we have to fire a man for some 
reason and he goes on unemployment, our 
unemployment costs are raised on us the 
minute you fire somebody for good reason. 
They don’t ask you what the reason is. You 
fired him, and it costs us money, and you’ve 
got to pay it. 

I had a man quit me here. He went 
down to Las Vegas and promptly went on 
unemployment compensation. Of course, 
he could’ve done it here. But that was what 
he was going to do. He quit work, and for no 
particular reason. He wasn’t mad at anybody. 
He was an elderly gentleman, a draftsman. He 
quit working. Next thing I know, he’s down 
there on unemployment compensation, my 
costs went up. 

So here is the architect. He started doing 
all his own work, with no income tax. And 
suddenly, he finds himself with the necessity 
for additional principals to handle parts of the 
work because one man can’t know enough to 
handle all these departments. He finds himself 
with the necessity of a rather elaborate office. 
The catalog files must be so complete and 
so well done that you can grab any catalog 
you want, almost, between two fingers. You 
can’t be hunting catalogs. And you must have 
catalogs to design. The materials market 
is represented by your catalog file. And, of 
course, your personal knowledge, sometimes, 
is rather large, too. 

And you have, now, coffee breaks in the 
morning and in the afternoon. We have fifteen 


[laughing] -minute coffee breaks that really 
are about twenty-five minutes, morning and 
afternoon. And they’re worth a couple or 
three hundred dollars a week in cost to us. 
So we have, also, greatly increased salary 
costs, largely compensated for by the greatly 
increased building costs, because we do a 
percentage business. 

So we start out, and we hire a draftsman at 
approximately twice what we used to pay for 
his base pay. We pay Social Security on him, 
we pay Nevada Industrial Commission on 
[him], we pay health and sickness insurance 
on him. We give him two weeks’ sick pay. We 
give him two weeks’ vacation pay. We give him 
two breaks each day for coffee. And ourselves, 
the principals, we have to put up a good chunk 
of money for Social Security. And we have 
to carry our own personal insurance (which 
is done largely by the firm), loss of business 
insurance, the death of a partner, all that sort 
of thing, providing money to take care of 
paying him off without hurting the business, 
and all that sort of—. These costs have come to 
the point where the modern architect’s office, 
now, is pretty nearly a computer-run deal. 

If he has a big business, he has to have 
several principals in architecture, and 
sometimes he has a principal in structural 
engineering, or two principals in structural 
engineering. He has heating and ventilating 
men who are registered men and are partners 
in the firm, sometimes, He has to have 
specifications writers, and these are a separate 
deal altogether today. The specification writer 
has to know a market that must be. ten times 
the kind of market that I had to deal with, in 
the complexity of materials, and all that sort 
of thing. 

The spec writers have to have almost at 
their fingertips a knowledge of the materials 
available in their area, and by their area, 
I mean in their section of the country. If 



148 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


an architect specifies materials that are 
manufactured in the East, we’ll say, why, the 
East people, who have an area tributary to 
their factory, are supplying that area, and 
you come along and want a bunch of their 
stuff, you may get it six months later. You do 
not get the service. You cannot get service on 
materials that come from New York City. They 
aren’t going to send people out here to service 
their materials. And servicing of materials is 
more and more becoming an important part 
of building. When you put something in that 
has movable parts, that has electric wiring, 
and so forth, there must be people available 
to keep it running. So the specification 
writer has to know what materials are 
advantageous in his area and what those costs 
are. And when he writes the specification, 
he usually has to include a specification that 
would permit three manufacturers, different 
manufacturers, with materials of different 
characteristics— generally overall the same 
material suitable for doing the job, but with 
some different characteristics—who might 
bid on this job in competition from one 
another to the contractors. He has to know 
the contractors’ practices. He has to be well 
aware of the subcontractor’s organization 
and their rules. They have an organization 
to protect themselves against proselyting by 
the general contractors. He must know all of 
these things so that he could come back to 
the designer of a part of the building and say, 
“Look. This is going to be almost impossible to 
get the materials without a delay, and certainly 
impossible to get service on them, and besides 
which, this is a very costly material which 
you don’t need in this job. And would you 
change your drawings to do so-and-so?” This 
specification writer is a man that is almost a 
supervisor of the drawings that are made in 
the office, in respect to materials and service 
and price, and that sort of thing. 


So he has a specification writer or a 
department. And that man has the catalogs 
of the office in his area and at his fingertips. 
And usually, if you need a catalog in order to 
get the characteristics of some material and its 
measurements and installation procedures in 
order to draw a plan, for instance, to make a 
plan of an air conditioning room, fan room, 
when you make a plan of a fan room, you 
could have so many great, large ducts flying 
around that you’d have to have stairs to get 
over them, on the other hand, you might be 
able to install the equipment so that you can 
walk around and service them. That’s the sort 
of thing that the specifications writer has to 
add to the fact that he just writes a paragraph 
that says, “You put in such-and-such lumber.” 

Now, he has to know the manufacturing 
characteristics and peculiarities of art industry 
in order to write specifications so that he’s 
going to get the thing that he specifies, 
instead of some substitute which takes care 
of the way he specified the job, but not what 
he wanted because he didn’t completely say 
it. So here we have a situation coming that 
architects feel they must have larger and larger 
offices, that they must have more and more 
expert personnel, more and more specialists 
available and under their thumb, subject to 
their direction. 

We have architects now, who, instead of 
practicing in their home area, due to the fact 
of chain stores and all sorts of national and 
international concerns dealing in large areas 
of the world, and they hire an architect in 
their area, who begins to be a specialist in 
their business, And they want to build, then, 
facilities in various parts of the world, and [if] 
he is to do this job for them, he’s got to know 
foreign countries, even. Re’s got to know what 
he’s going to run up against, whether he can 
bring workmen into foreign countries, even, 
before he designs the job. 



Summary of Architectural Career 


149 


[This applies to] states, between states, 
and between sections of the country. In the 
Northwest, lumber is available in all ways, 
tremendous, large sizes of lumber, the glued 
lumber, plywood, veneers. Almost anything 
in lumber is available, and your designs, then, 
are going to feature, to a great extent, lumber. 
Put you go down to Los Angeles, they don’t 
have any lumber. Your designs are going to 
feature reinforced concrete and steel and 
various types of synthetics on walls, and what 
have you. You go to Denver, and you have a 
place where they have neither timber, nor 
are they very concrete-oriented, but they are 
strong on brick and concrete block and cinder 
block, and all that sort of thing. So they have 
a material market and a use of materials that’s 
rather peculiar to their area. You go down 
to Florida and Louisiana, in the southern 
pine timber district, and you, again, come 
into a lumber area, where the steel people 
many years ago wrote a building code for a 
southern Building Officials Conference that 
was oriented toward steel and toward light 
steel—in a timber country. And it created 
quite a furor for a while, trying to get the 
things organized, but this is a timber country 
again. And you come back up to New York 
and the New England [section], and they are 
just loaded with all kinds of manufactured 
articles-synthetics, plastics—everything you 
could think of. Glass, Structural glass (is] used 
to a great extent there. In the Midwest, the 
American Association of Building Officials, 
they have another set of requirements. When 
you get up to Alaska, you have the hoarfrost, 
or whatever they call it, the deeply frozen 
ground. And you have, again, a different 
problem, different requirements for materials, 
routines, and for mechanics. 

So the architect who represents a large 
company now, doing business worldwide, 
or even nationwide, suddenly needs a much 


more complete and complex organization 
than he ever needed before, because he’s going 
to be called on to do a great many different 
kinds of jobs in different areas. 

Transportation also has a great deal to 
do with the materials you may select and the 
people you may use. You find that if you have 
to bring people fifty miles from an adjacent 
city in order to do the work on the job you’re 
doing there, all of a sudden, they get portal-to- 
portal pay. They get paid for their travel time. 
Maybe they get paid overtime for it; don’t 
know, then paid for the time on the business 
and going back. Now, that all has to be done 
in their seven-hour day or their eight-hour 
day and their five-day week, or whatever it is. 
If you don’t do it in that, you’re immediately 
up against time and a half. When an architect 
who’s designing a building has a budget, he 
has to know that. 

Another thing (and I’ve told you this) 
that is coming into practice is the design 
of buildings by means of computers. They 
take into account many of these things that 
I’ve been discussing with you—finances, 
mechanics available, the population and its 
change, and all that sort of thing. And they 
come up with some answers (and I don’t 
know how they do it, but they use them), 
and this dictates the kind of a building and 
the size of the building, dictates a great deal 
about the building that will be built. And 
their architect, then, the owner’s architect 
who uses this computer information, comes 
to an area like Reno and says to me, “I want 
you to do,” we’ll say, “a Holiday Inn.’ They do 
computerize the inns. 

“What will you charge me?” Here is a 
preliminary layout that’s practically complete. 
You don’t—very little work to do. “What’ll you 
charge me?” 

Fe tries to beat you down on your fee 
because he says he’s furnishing you with a 



150 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


lot of data free of charge. And if you take 
it, you’ll lose money So he comes in here, 
he gives you this data. You do the plans and 
specifications. A local architect builds it, and 
he’s gone someplace else and designs seven 
more of these things in the meantime and 
got architects to do it. So you can see. I think 
I have covered quite a large difference in the 
practice of architecture and the reasons for 
it today. 



14 

Civic and Fraternal Affairs 


When we came back from the service, 
several of us (this was in 1918) got together 
and organized the United Veterans. This was 
a forerunner of the American Legion, which, 
almost at the same time, was being born in 
Paris. And the next year, I think it was, we 
abandoned our United Veterans organization 
in favor of becoming a part of the American 
Legion. The name of our pout comes from 
barrel Dunkle, a young man, the son of the 
county treasurer, Dan Dunkle, who was killed 
in World War I. So we became barrel Dunkle 
Post No. 1. At the same time, there came into 
being the 40 et 8 organization, which was a 
“fun” organization of the American Legion. 
And as a matter of fact, it was pretty rough 
fun part of the time. 

I was very much interested in the American 
Legion at the time, and so I went through the 
various offices and became commander of 
barrel Dunkle post. From there, I went to 
district commander for the American Legion 
of the northern district. And that’s as far as 
I went going for state commander. By that 
time, I was a little bit—I’d had quite a bit of 


American Legion [laughing] work, and I 
didn’t want to go that far, although for a good 
many years, I participated in the statewide 
American Legion work and their politics, 
which grew with the years. Jim Scrugham 
was very active in the American Legion and 
was present at all of our conventions, yearly 
conventions, when we elected our state 
commander and discussed the election of the 
national commander. I think Jim Scrugham 
was at one time the national commander, 
although I’ve forgotten whether he was or not. 
Most of the things that occurred are just silly. 

The Legion politics were usually a contest 
between the Las Vegas boys and the boys 
from the north. And there was a great 
deal of jockeying around, trying to get the 
representatives from other parts of the state 
to stand with us. And I remember we had a 
convention in Elko (and I don’t have dates 
for these things), they were running a man 
for state commander, and we were running 
Vein Hursh for state commander, I believe. 
That went on for three days. And at the end of 
three days, everything was tied, tie, tie, tie. We 



152 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


got a man from Elko to change his vote, and 
we won, by one vote. And our man became 
the state commander. Those conventions, at 
times, got to be quite bitter. And after it was 
all over, everybody forgot about it, seemingly, 
until the next year. 

We had a convention in Hawthorne, and 
Jim Scrugham, who was quite prominent in 
American Legion for a long time, was down 
there with us. And we had a similar fight 
about a Las Vegas man and a Reno man. The 
details of that thing, as the election, I have 
forgotten. I remember one thing: Ted Withers 
was a very prominent Legion man, and very 
active. And at the conventions, ha was also a 
very persuasive talker. And we would get a 
room for ourselves and get Ted in this room, 
and he usually had [laughing] a drink in one 
hand, and we would parade by him the people 
we were trying to get on our side for votes. 
And hed talk to them. And he’d be—I can 
still see him, leaning against the end of one 
of these beds, these old-time beds, that had 
a high foot piece, with a drink in his hand. 
And we’d bring in the next guy, and they’d 
“Bla bla bla,” they’d talk around—maybe we 
got the vote and maybe we didn’t. I think we 
lost it there. 

I remember Jim Scrugham took a cabin, 
right down on the lake in Hawthorne, and 
this was our headquarters. And we came 
down there, the only thing they could get 
for liquor in those days was gin. So they had 
gin and ginger ale for drinks. And Scrugham 
was always trying to get me to sing at this 
[laughing]— at this place. I didn’t want to 
sing. I wanted to play poker. And I was sitting 
in a poker game, and Scrugham bought me 
a drink in a tin cup (and the tin cup, I mean 
it must have held a pint or more; it was a big 
one), set it down alongside of me. I found out 
later his idea had been to get me high, and 
then he’d make me sing. 


Rut Scotty Harrington (laughing], who 
was playing in the game alongside of me, he 
casually picked up the tin cup and ultimately 
drank its contents. Well, its contents were 
straight gin, nothing mixed with it at all. So 
he must have drunk pretty close to a pint 
of straight gin, in a rather short time. And 
it was very shortly after that, that in a stud 
[laughing] hand, with two aces in sight against 
him, he called a five-dollar bet, which was a 
tremendous bet in those days. He called a 
five-dollar bet with nothing. Why, sure, he 
called it. [Laughing] He really got high! Well, 
he couldn’t do that in stud poker, because he 
was beaten, in sight. He got his five dollars 
back, but those were the things—. 

I remember we found some rattlesnakes 
close by the place, in a hedge. And these idiots 
were down on their knees trying to get these 
snakes out so they [laughing] —. Nobody got 
bitten. But I don’t know why they didn’t get 
bitten. These were professional men, too. They 
were a little bit nutty. 

Well, the Legion conventions were 
largely fun, and the politics, as I say, were 
completely local to the Legion, until, I guess, 
Molly Malone became state commander, 
And at that point, there was some attempt to 
inject politics into the Legion and get a solid 
phalanx of Legion voters behind Malone. I 
don’t know—don’t remember how successful 
it was because I was phasing out of my Legion 
activities at the time. So he became senator. I 
don’t know how much the Legion had to do 
with it. But in general, I would say that the 
American Legion was not in state politics 
at all. 

[What about the connections with the 
national Legion organization?] Yes, we had 
a representative whom we elected to go to 
the national conventions. I think Molly ran 
for national commander. He made a run 
for national—. And at that time, I suppose a 



Civic and Fraternal Affairs 


153 


number of the Legionnaires went with him. 
I didn’t. I don’t recollect just what happened 
because, as I say, I had phased out of it, and 
I wasn’t interested in Mr. Malone’s politics, 
particularly. So that’s about all I can tell you, 
except to say that I don’t think the American 
Legion was involved in state politics to any 
degree. [In spite of Mr. Scrugham and some 
of the others?] No, Mr. Scrugham might have 
been trying to solidity a little voting bloc; I 
don’t know. I voted for him anyhow. I think 
the American Legion was simply one of 
the organizations that he frequented partly 
because he was a politician and partly because 
he was a Legionnaire. 

I thought that Jim Scrugham was a great 
guy. And as I think I’ve indicated from time to 
time, he was my very good friend. I think I’ll 
tell you about the night he was elected senator. 
Well, the night he was elected senator, Scott 
Harrington and I were down looking at the 
returns, and so forth. And when it was more or 
less decided that Jim had been elected, we went 
over to see him. And Jim, at that time, owned 
the Nevada State Journal. That was located on 
Center Street, between First and Second. And 
I had remodeled those premises for him and 
made an office, I remember, for him, with a big 
fireplace in it. He had to have a big fireplace. 
So we went over, and he was still there. And 
as I say, I was rather close to Jim Scrugham 
for a long time. We congratulated him on his 
election, and he said, “Come on, I’m going out 
to the house, and we’ll have a drink.” 

So we went out to the house, and he had 
two specialties. One was called a “Pahrump 
wildcat,” and the other was his mint julep. 
So he made us a mint julep and a Pahrump 
wildcat, and we got home about five o’clock 
[laughing]. 

But I remember, alongside his bed, that 
he had a chair on the right and a chair on 
the left, and both chairs were piled high with 


Congressional Records that he’d been reading 
in case he got elected. And I don’t know what 
else he had been doing to familiarize himself 
with the national politics. Rut the man was 
brilliant, he was a very hard worker, and he 
did many things. 

One of his pet projects was the Valley of 
Fire, where I think he finally had a cabin of 
his own down there. He did a lot of work with 
getting a park down there. 

[What sort of a need do I think the Legion 
fulfilled for these veterans that it doesn’t seem 
to be doing now?] You see, in World War I, 
there’re a lot of us, like me, for instance, that 
were not going to be drafted. We thought that 
was going to be a little bit of a taint, We were 
going to enlist. Today, the only practical way 
of handling induction into the service is by 
draft. Enlistments, I think, are a very small 
part of it. And the attitude toward the war was 
one of patriotism, one of eagerness. There’d 
been no wars. Nobody knew what war was 
like. War was a little romantic in those days. 
They found out when they got over to France 
that war was mud and blood and guts. But in 
thinking about it, it was a romantic sort of a 
thing—go fight for the country. And also, in 
the back of their minds was the fact that they’d 
be over in Europe and they’d travel around 
quite a bit and see things. And when they 
came back, there was still this attitude that 
war was a great thing, and they had been in 
there, and they did their bit, and they wanted 
to talk to the guys that had been in it. There 
was a brotherhood of veterans. And it wasn’t 
until the Legion got fairly numerous here that 
some of the boys decided, “Well, now, just a 
minute. A lot of these fellows never got out of 
this country. And they’re calling themselves 
veterans. And we went over there and we 
fought, and we are veterans. We’ll have the 
Veterans of Foreign War[s].” And so, there 
was a division then that came in, between the 



154 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


men who had actually been in combat and the 
men who had been in the service but had not 
been sent over for combat. This was the first 
sort of rift in that idea of these boys, that war 
[was] something that you rushed into, and 
you were a hero [laughing]. 

Well, as of today, you can see what they 
think about it. The men who are going to 
have to fight, they think it’s useless. They don’t 
think it solves anything. We’ve had two wars 
to end all war, and we find that today, we have 
more wars going than any time in the history 
of the world. People, they try to resolve their 
differences with force. And we’re doing it in 
civilian life, So there is a complete change of 
attitude. 

I can remember at a Legion parade—or a 
parade, anyhow (it may not have been Legion) 
—and I was one of the spectators, and here 
was a guy standing alongside of me, with his 
hat cocked off to one side, a cigarette dripping 
out of his mouth, and his hands in his pocket, 
and the flag came by. Well, when the flag came 
by, I want to tell you, we got up on our hind 
legs and we saluted it. Arid here is this so-and- 
so, standing there paying no attention, and I 
hit him in the mouth, He stumbled and fell 
down. And everybody was perfectly willing 
to jump in and help me if I needed it. They 
thought that was what this fellow should have. 
Well, if you hit anybody in the mouth today, 
there’d be nineteen hippies on you) This is a 
big change in the attitude toward the flag, you 
know, I wrote something to the flag that will 
just tell you what I thought of it and what we 
thought of it. Maybe I can find it right here. 
[Consulting papers] Here it is. Just for fun, 
I’ll read this to you. I think it shows what our 
attitude was as compared [to] today. This was 
for a Shrine ceremonial, and they always have 
a tribute to the flag. And I said, 

As we pause in our proceedings 

to pay tribute to the flag, I think we 


all feel that the real tribute is not in 
the spoken word of any man. It is in 
our hearts and our thoughts, each to 
his own. The beauties we see in those 
stars and stripes are not alone a figure 
in color and motion. They are, rather, 
the beauties of our way of life. We 
love our freedoms, our prosperity, 
and our security. And we revere the 
memory of the men who fought to 
keep them for their own and future 
generations. As individuals, the flag 
is all things to all men. To veterans 
of all the services, it brings back 
memories all their own. To bereaved 
home folk, it has a special and very 
tender meaning. And it is a symbol 
of security to those who plan for their 
declining years. To each of us, it has 
a peculiar and personal significance. 
And because it is there for us to see, we 
are better able to meet our problems 
with courage and determination. But 
times are changing. The old order 
of man to man, enemies that can be 
seen, and the protection of our rights 
and our possessions by force—that 
order is passing. Resort to force will 
soon mean utter ruin without victory. 
New problems must be met, and there 
is among us a growing number of 
organizations, some economic, some 
subversive, and some even criminal, 
seeking to impose their will on all 
who oppose them. And insofar as 
they are successful, they take away 
from the sum of those things for 
which the flag stands as a beautiful 
symbol. Most of us are tired of war 
and uncertainty, and we’d like to sit 
back and live our lives in the way 
we think is best. But if we don’t alert 
ourselves to the raids being made 



Civic and Fraternal Affairs 


155 


on our way of life, the symbolism of 
the flag will be undermined and its 
meaning dimmed. As individuals 
and as communities, we must put our 
minds to seeking an awareness and a 
solution of those problems so that the 
flag may retain its beauty in our hearts 
as in our eyes. 

Now, there is an attitude just at a time 
when Communism was coming. I don’t have a 
date on this, but it’s got to be in the early ’50’s, 
I think, because Communism was becoming 
recognized, to some extent. And you can 
see that this is a pretty wide-eyed sort of a 
thing. But it was an acceptable attitude at that 
time. It’s not acceptable now. The minorities 
have found out that by combining, they can 
whip the majorities hands down because the 
majorities do not get together and stop them. 

I think one of the nicest things I’ve heard 
in a long time is what has happened at the 
University of Nevada. I’m just so proud of that 
University. These hippies came up there and 
they threw them in the lake. And they haven’t 
been back. And this last little fuss that they 
started, the large majority of students were not 
with it at all. There’ve been some expressions 
of opinion that were very nice. I’m just proud 
of this university. I wish that a lot of these 
universities would quit their demonstrating 
by force, hold orderly meetings, and by a 
majority opinion presented in a proper way 
to proper authorities, show that a change must 
be made. Because a university is the students. 
And if they, with their new thinking and with 
their new injection into the higher places in 
our way of life—. 

The executives, the men who run things 
in this country, are becoming younger and 
younger. Their aggressiveness and their 
ability to carry through and work is needed 
in this day that is so complicated. And there’s 


so many things to be done, and so much 
impact from one thing upon another thing 
that it takes a youthful mind and a youthful 
body to stand up to it for too long. So these 
youngsters, they have a right to want change, 
nut they’re going about it, right now, in what 
I think is the wrong way. Perhaps it’s the right 
way, because they’re getting a recognition 
of their needs and of their determination to 
solve their problems that might be very good 
for them, as they begin to approach these 
problems with reason and with explanations 
of their needs and the demands for change 
that will improve things for these younger 
men, who, as I say, are becoming the people 
who run our country. We’ve having big 
corporation presidents, and so forth, of forty, 
forty-five years of age. And they’re doing a 
marvelous job. 

The elder people, the older people, are 
pretty much out of it. They are not sought for 
their opinions, for their experience, because 
their experience is not An line with what’s 
going on today. They are relics of a system 
that needs to be changed. So they’re just 
there. It’s rather a sad situation, that a man 
who has been, we’ll say, a professional man 
all his life, he’s been sought for his knowledge 
and experience, and for his abilities in public 
service—how do you explain a free service to 
the city and the state, this sort of thing? You 
take part [in] things that are needed because 
you have a desire to make things better where 
you live and for the people around you. They 
are now not sought at all. As a matter of fact, 
they get recognition, they are treated with 
respect, but it’s just in passing. You’re not a 
stopping place any more because you are not 
able to contribute by either experience, and 
perhaps by inclination, to the new thing. 

My own education, I thought, was the 
education in vogue at the time. You studied 
your books, you got your theory, and there 



156 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


wasn’t a great deal of application of theory to 
practical life. 

I remember I was asked to make a talk to 
the engineers club. This was—well, we’ll say 
while I was building inspector, someplace 
around in that time. My talk had to do 
with the study of English. At that time, the 
professor that I knew up there every now and 
then mentioned the fact that the engineering 
population of the school resented the fact that 
English was required. What did they need 
English for in order to be an engineer? 

So my speech at that time, and for a couple 
of years, as a matter of fact, two or three years, 
I was asked to make a talk at one of their 
evening meetings—you know, dinner and a 
little talk. The talk had to do with the ability to 
think vocally, to put forth your thoughts and 
your convictions, put forth your knowledge 
succinctly so that someone listening to you 
went away with some idea of what you had 
said. And put it to them this way, that they 
might become the most brilliant engineers in 
the University, in their class, or most brilliant 
engineers—any way you want to look at it. 
But if they could not sit down and impart to 
people who needed engineering services, who 
were in charge of large projects, if they could 
not impart to those people the knowledge that 
they had what it took to do the job, they might 
apply and apply and apply and get no jobs 
at all. And what’s the use of being able to do 
something if you never get a chance to do it? 

So I would have one or two or three of the 
men (and I usually picked on someone who 
stuttered or couldn’t talk for [laughing] sour 
apples) get up and tell the engineers what 
ha expected to do. And they were complete 
flops. They had no idea how to approach 
their subject or what to say, and it was rather 
pitiful. But it did bring home the fact that if 
this young man was sitting before one of the 
students as an employer and asked him for a 


job and trying to tell hint what he could do, 
that he wouldn’t get anyplace. Well, I helped a 
little bit at the time, but not greatly. They still 
thought, by golly, a surveyor and a designer 
of bridges, that’s the stuff I We’ll build a dart, 
but we won’t talk about it.. 

So the next organization, I guess, would 
be the Masons, when my mother died, I began 
to think a little bit about coming to the peak 
of my life and starting on the downward 
side, so to speak, and began to have a little 
wonderment about what death meant. And 
since my wife and I, neither of us, had been 
affiliated with any church nor did we wish 
to be affiliated with any church, I decided 
that the Masons might have the approach to 
religion, and so forth, in which I would be 
interested. And that’s the reason that I joined 
the Masons. 

I was a member of the first class to be 
initiated in Mt. Pose No. 40. The original 
Masonic lodges here had grown to such extent 
that it was deemed expedient to create another 
lodge, which was Mt. Rose No. 40. Perhaps 
also [No.] 35 was also ahead of us. I guess it 
was. I guess they had [No.] 13,35, and then 40. 

The Masonic work, very largely symbolic, 
quotes a great deal of material from the Bible. 
And I, not being able to understand these 
quotes, got myself a Bible and started reading 
it. And I found it was very interesting to see 
what the symbolic sort of parables really tried 
to say, gave me a new slant on the work of 
Masonry, certainly. And it also convinced me 
that, insofar as the Bible was concerned, and 
my religious concepts, that the Sermon on the 
Mount carried the entire thing. 

However, one night I got a call from the 
then Master of Mt. Rose lodge, Ed Pine, asking 
me if I would be the chaplain for the lodge. 
And I jumped at the chance. An amusing 
incident happened in connection with this, 
that the day after I got the call and accepted 



Civic and Fraternal Affairs 


157 


as the chaplain, Mt. Rose lodge had a first or 
second birthday—had a birthday, anyhow. 
And we had a banquet at the “V’l down in 
Sparks. There were about a hundred and fifty, 
all told, at this banquet. And as we sat down to 
the table, the Worshipful Master rose, rapped 
for order, and said, “The Chaplain will ask the 
blessing.” 

Well, the chaplain didn’t know word one 
of any blessing. I was struggling to find a 
few words, at least, that I could get by with. 
Put you know, when a group of people stand 
up, there’s a high roar of conversation which 
gradually dies down. And they begin to stand 
up and chairs are pulled back, and their feet 
are shuffling. There’s a great deal of confusion 
for half a minute, or a minute, sometimes. 
During that time, I turned to my wife, and I 
said, “Do you know any blessings?” 

And she was very helpful. She said, “Only 
you, dear” [laughing] 

So just about the time that the thing got 
completely quiet, I realized that I had been 
muttering a little bit to myself, and I had 
spoken to my wife—my lips had been moving. 
So I said, “Amen” 

And everybody said, “So mote it be, they 
all sat down, and we [laughing] had dinner. 

And later on, one of my comrades met 
me, and I think probably he was feeling a little 
bit high, and he assured me that I had done 
a marvelous job with the blessing [laughing]. 

Well, I went on through the chairs to 
become the Master of my lodge. I consider 
that period as very rewarding, philosophically, 
particularly through the studies that I initiated 
myself, more or less out of curiosity. 

I went through the Scottish rite and 
became a Shriner. And then, having heard that 
the York rite was much more deeply religious 
and meaningful in some of its degrees, I also 
went through the York rite to the Shrine. And 
that, also, was very rewarding. And I consider 


that my time with the Masons has helped me 
very greatly to establish a more comfortable 
philosophy of living than I had had in the past. 

That, I guess, is about all there is to do with 
Masonry. I have not been active in Masonry 
for a good many year s— three, four, five, at 
least, now—and probably will not go back into 
it in an active way. 

The other night, I was given a Master’s 
apron. They had the Master of Masons for the 
state of Nevada at Mt. Rose [No.] 40, and they 
presented aprons to three past Masters. Isn’t 
that nice? And a case to go with it. 

Well, the Art Gallery, I was a member of 
the board of directors for about ten years, I 
guess, during which time we added a section 
to the Art Gallery and made it available to 
various groups, such as people interested in 
photography, people interested in painting. 
It was available for shows for them and for 
meetings for them, and for a very small price. 
When I left the Art Gallery, I left because one 
of the societies (and I can’t think of the name 
of it; it’s the biggest one in art), these women 
decided that they thought they were putting 
more money into the gallery than the gallery 
was. And the gallery only has a small bunch of 
stock, and so forth, the interest on that bunch 
of stock, and it doesn’t amount to a great deal 
per year. So they sort of decided that they were 
putting in more money and having a greater 
need for the Art Gallery than the Art Gallery 
people who had started it, and they all joined 
the Art Gallery, which you could do for five 
dollars a year, or maybe three dollars a year. 
Anyhow, it was a small amount of money. 
They joined it and then ran a ticket of people 
for the board of directors and ran the old boys 
off, and I don’t know what they’ve done with 
it since then. But they took over, and there’s 
not much you can do with a thing like that. 

It wasn’t a very good art gallery. It was 
simply abominable storage for the pieces they 



158 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


couldn’t display. And, of course, it was all 
amateur work, the cataloging, everything. It 
was all done by amateurs donating their time, 
so that it wasn’t a very tremendously business¬ 
like operation, and it won’t be until such time 
as there is a recognition of the various groups 
interested in art, sculptors and painters and 
photographers, and so forth, carvers, and 
they’re able to get an adequate quarters for 
the showing of their work, for their shows, 
and for displays, and all that sort of thing, and 
for the permanent collection of an art gallery, 
don’t think that a town the size of Reno can 
support very much of an art gallery. They’ve 
tried to interest the University of Nevada in 
our Art Gallery so that we could cooperate 
with them, and they couldn’t cooperate with 
anybody. They’re a state institution, and they 
do it their way, period—no cooperation. 

So the Art Gallery is pluggin’ along, doing 
the best it can. And I havens t been involved 
in it in four, five years now. 

[How did I happen to get involved in 
the first place?] Well, they wanted someone 
in there to—well, they wanted a whip. They 
wanted someone to make decisions and 
make things go. And they had some women 
in there—oh, don’t use those names—’’those 
good women, fine gals.” But they were getting 
a little bit old. They couldn’t do all the work. 
Dee [Delores] Young, she was a hard worker 
in there. She was young enough so that she 
could really work day in and day out, if 
necessary. But they needed some people on 
the board of directors who could take steps. 
So I was one of those people that was asked 
if I would—well, it was a nine-year term. So I 
went for a nine-year term and part of another 
term, ’till they voted me off. And we did build 
an addition, but we never could get enough 
money to build any parking or to build any 
adequate storage space. On that board, we had 
the head of the trust department here, Dick 


Kwapil. And we had I guess Robert Hawkins. 
He was taking care of the investments. And 
Dick Kwapil, who was the head of the trust 
department at the [First National] Bank, he 
was the depository for those things, and also, 
there was a recommendation of what they 
could do in the way of spending money and 
couldn’t. So I was one of the three that went 
on, and, as I say, more or less in the hope 
that we could make some decisions and get 
some progress. But we didn’t make anything 
like the progress that they thought we would 
make when they thought we were a couple 
of miracle workers, you know. Nothing to it. 
We’d have a great big art gallery right now. So 
that’s all there was to the Art Gallery. 

Well, the Magic Circle was a group of 
men interested in legerdemain, magic of 
various kinds. They had regular meetings, 
and there were several men at that time who 
were outgoing people and liked to appear 
and do shows with their magic. One of them, 
particularly, was a lawyer, a fellow named 
[Cliff] Young. Johnson, Axel Johnson, he 
just loved to do magic. He attended all of 
the meetings of the national Magic Circles 
wherever they might be. And he picked up 
various ideas about tricks he could do. I 
don’t know whether the Magic Circle’s still 
going or not, now. But in those days, when 
he went to a party, he would be bulging like 
this [gesture in front), and stuff in his coat 
pockets and under his coat, and he’d love to 
walk up to somebody. He walked up rather 
slowly, and he’d lean over them, and I can 
remember one of his favorite tricks was to 
borrow your diamond ring, engagement 
ring. And he had a dime store engagement 
ring, which, oh, would approximate a lot of 
engagement rings. And he would tie a string 
to this engagement ring from the middle of a 
handkerchief. The handkerchief would be in 
here (breast pocket]. And he’d borrow your 



Civic and Fraternal Affairs 


159 


engagement ring. Well, he palmed it. And 
he’d say, “Now, I’m going to drop this in the 
cup, here, and cover it with a handkerchief.’ 
He’d bring the handkerchief out, and his 
other hand was over it, and he’d drop the 
ring that was in the handkerchief into the 
cup and kept the ring that you had given 
him in his hand. And then, he made a few 
passes and had a little conversation, and he 
jerked the handkerchief off, and the ring was 
gone, because it was tied to the handkerchief. 
Put the handkerchief in his pocket. And, 
of course, the lady began to be a little bit 
exercised about it. She knew it was going 
to be all right, but she just wondered where 
that ring was. 

Well, Axel would fool around doing other 
tricks with other people, and while he was 
doing so, he I would) drop into somebody’s 
top coat pocket the ring. And then he’d get 
looking around for the ring and “reading 
minds,” and one [thing and] another, and 
the next thing you know, he’d have this guy 
picked out as the prowler that had the ring. 
And he’d go and he’d say, “Just let me pull out 
the ring.” And sometimes the guy was really 
embarrassed about it, if he did it well enough. 

I remember one night we went out to 
the Game Farm. We had a big doin’s every 
year. It was a “ladies’ night,” we called it. And 
this ladies’ night we had at the Game Farm, 
which is not in existence. But I was very much 
interested in magic at the time, and I had 
[Harold] Cafferata, who was also very much 
interested, and a very fine mechanic with his 
hands, he was to be the master of ceremonies. 
And he asked me to put on a show. And he 
said, “I’ll give you half an hour.” we all put 
on shows. 

So I forgot it. And came the night of the 
party, Ruth said, “Better get your shower,” 
and so forth. 

“Well, what for?” 


And, “Go to the Magic Circle.” And, Lord, 
I’d forgotten all about it! 

So I didn’t have any time to figure out a 
routine. So I just took just about everything 
I had and dumped it into a suitcase, and we 
went out to the Magic Circle. So Caffy found 
this out. And he put me on first. And I can 
remember there was another fellow who was 
going to do some tricks with some rabbits. 
And in order to do it, he had to put the 
rabbits to sleep by doing something behind 
their ears, and another man who was going 
to do a cigarette trick, and in order to do it, 
he had to have quite a few lighted cigarettes 
ready. 

So I went out and started to do my routine, 
and these two fellows went back of the stage, 
and at what they thought was a reasonable 
time, I guess they lit their cigarettes and they 
put their rabbits to sleep. And Caffy, [as) soon 
as I’d do one trick, he’d reach down in this 
suitcase, Well, what’s this?” 

And I was having a ball! So about three 
quarters to an hour later, he wanted me to do a 
little trick whereby you select a card and your 
wrist where your pulse is—I’ve got my arms 
around you, too, to do this [laughing]. And I 
can tell by your reaction whether I’m getting 
close or not. So I start asking questions. “Is it 
red,” or, “Is it black, above an eight, below an 
eight, a picture card, da de da da? And I keep 
getting, zeroing in on this card, closer and 
closer, and telling this lady, whoever it was. 
This was some little lady I didn’t know. But she 
got so fussed up and embarrassed about the 
whole thing that by the time I finally zeroed 
in on this card—and I knew what it was all 
the time— she was just practically jittery- And 
when I told her, “Is that the card” (she had 
seen the card; she neglected it), she said, “yes,” 
and just practically ran to her seat, sat down, 
giggled, and one thing and another—really 
had her going! It was a lot of fun. 



160 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


And what the heck was it at the Century 
Club there that happened? Oh. Took the 
shirt off a guy. You know, you sit him down 
in a chair and you finally get around to the 
point where you grab his shirt and jerk it and 
the whole thing comes off? Well, [laughing] 
we didn’t get these things [wrist buttons] 
unbuttoned, and they were fastened to 
his wrist. [Laughing] I jerked his shirt off, 
jerked him out of the chair and down on the 
floor [laughing]. Oh, a lot of funny things 
happened because the tricks didn’t work 
right, you know. 

I had another trick in which you arranged 
the cards in .a deck. I forgot, but it’s arranged— 
suppose it started with the ace of clubs. Then 
I’d go diamonds, hearts, spades, and I’d put 
the deuce of spades. And then I’d go clubs, 
diamond, hearts and I’d put the trey of hearts, 
and so on, until I had the whole deck arranged 
in that way. 

And the upshot of that was that I could 
take a whole deck of cards and spread them 
out, and you’d pick a card. “Don’t show it to 
me.” And I would simply have you put it back 
after you’d looked at it, and then I’d reverse 
the deck. I’d put the other half on the bottom, 
which meant that the card that I wanted to see, 
that you had picked, was the third card from 
the card I put on the bottom, or the fourth, 
which— I’ve forgotten just exactly what that 
sequence was. But if I see the four of clubs 
on the bottom, then I’d say that your card 
was—diamonds, hearts, spade—was a spade, 
and it’d be the seven of spades. So you’d pick 
a card, and I’d get that on the bottom and see 
what card was on the bottom, and I knew 
what card you’d picked, and you’d still have the 
card. I’d never see it or anything. You just take 
it out of the deck and put it in your pocket. 
And then I’d do that for about four cards. I 
did it for six once and forgot the last one or 
two [laughing]. 


And then I would “read minds,” and 
gradually I’d discover where the card was and 
who had it and what it was, and it went over. 
These [were] simple little tricks, most of them. 
We didn’t have a great deal of equipment. We 
did have the equipment where you put cards 
in an envelope. The man actually put the cards 
in the envelope and sealed them, only what 
he didn’t realize was when I was throwing the 
cards down in a pile, he was putting in his 
envelope, He wasn’t getting what he thought 
he was. .And I had an envelope of my own 
concealed. He has a sealed envelope with a 
bunch of cards, and I tell him what’s in it. 
He took it. Right in front of the people, he 
took it from me. I tell him, “Well, this is quite 
mystifying for people who are interested in 
magic,” and they don’t see it too often. They 
get a kick out of it. 

Oh, we had as one of our members the 
arbitrator of the bank failures, Leo Schmidt, 
very interested in magic. Well, Leo got sick. 
He didn’t feel like going out. We would go 
to Minden or Carson or Fallon and put on 
a show, three or four of us. And we had a 
professional clown in the organization. He 
always loved to doll up in his clown uniform 
(that is, he had been a professional clown) and 
do his act of magic in clown uniform. And 
we’d go out and do it for ladies’ organizations 
or a Chamber of Commerce dinner, or 
anything of the sort. And that went on for 
four or five years and was very interesting, and 
everybody got a big kick out of it, and then it 
got old hat. And some of the fellows who were 
real enthusiasts, such as Leo Schmidt, Axel 
Johnson got so that he would be happy to do 
a few things in a room, but he didn’t want to 
make a trip anyplace, and it died out. 

Then we decided we’d teach the kids. And 
so the Magic Circle was now going to bring 
in a lot of youngsters and teach them tricks 
and let them have some fun with the Magic 



Civic and Fraternal Affairs 


161 


Circle. But the glamour wore off of that real 
fast with the kids. When they first came in, 
boy, they were bug-eyed. Then after about 
the seventh or eighth meeting, they had lots 
of other things to do, and this was a chore. 
So that died. 

Now, I don’t know whether there’s a Magic 
Circle or not. But it was just a lot of fun. We’d 
buy tricks and find out that we didn’t get the 
full apparatus and couldn’t do them. Then 
we’d try to make something to make it work, 
change the trick all around. By the time we 
got through, you couldn’t recognize it, but we 
were doing something [laughing] we thought 
was fun. So, as I say, the Magic Circle died out. 

Prospectors? I was a very early member. 
My number was thirty-one, and it’s now 
fifteen. So many people between me and 
number one have died out that I’m now 
number fifteen in the Prospectors Club. But 
the Prospectors Club, as it was originally 
organized, they tried to make it quite a 
social thing, interest the ladies. Oh, they had 
costume nights and ladies’ nights for dancing, 
and that sort of thing. But they just got too 
heterogeneous a mass of people, and groups 
didn’t like other groups or didn’t want to mess 
around with other groups, you know, and 
there’re usually a couple of fellows that got 
out of line, so that, today, they have a ladies’ 
night once a year, sometimes twice a year, 
and it’s largely a lot of cocktails and dinner 
with some dancing. And it’s got to the point 
where they get two arid three hundred. It’s 
just a big bash, that’s all. Nobody particularly 
looks forward to it. You don’t think that you 
and Mrs. So-and-so and Mrs. So-and-so and 
Mrs. So-and-so are going to go out and it’s 
going to be a nice night, and you meet people 
you know, and that sort of thing. It hasn’t 
evolved that way. It’s a luncheon club, is what it 
amounts to. And I have not taken any interest 
in the Prospectors Club as regards helping 


them put on their parties or house committee, 
or anything of that sort, and this is probably 
part of my feeling that I don’t want to have 
any more committee work, because I usually 
have to do it all, and I don’t feel like doing it 
all any more, don’t want to be tied down to 
doing something. 

Yesterday, Bunny and I were talking, I 
said, “Why don’t we go down and look at the 
Calaveras Big Trees?” 

And she said, “Well, I could go Friday” 

I says, “All right, we’ll go Friday. I’ll get 
a reservation in some motel, and we’ll come 
back Saturday.” 

This is what we like to do. So we’ll go 
down to the Big Trees, and we’ll go down to 
Columbia, and we’ll go down to Jackson, and 
go down to Columbia, particularly. They’re 
revamping Columbia. And we’ll stay in the 
old Sonora Inn, maybe, and we could come 
back through Yosemite, if we wanted to. I 
don’t think we’ll try that because it’s probably 
loaded with cars and people, you know. But 
that’s the sort of thing I like to do. I don’t want 
to be tied down. If I happen to want to go take 
a trip tomorrow, well, I say to Bunny, “Let’s 
go,” and she’s packed that night. We get in the 
car and go someplace, and if we went down 
to Silverada for four days once, “Oh, what’s 
the use of going home?” So we went down to 
Cannel for six or seven days. And this is a nice 
life! And it’s surprisingly inexpensive, if you 
take the difference between staying home and 
going someplace in a car. If you’re traveling in 
airplanes, and so forth, it gets to be expensive. 
If you’re taking your time and traveling in a 
car, there’s not such a great difference in the 
expense of living at home and entertaining a 
little, or what have you, than going on a trip 
someplace. So that’s what I like to do. 

I am not again going to be tied into 
any compulsory committee work. Oh, for 
instance, here’s .a Coca Cola man, Farr, Curt 



162 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Parr. They sold the Coca Cola plant. And he 
could be free to do anything he wanted to, 
except that he’s way up in the Shrine. And it’s 
going to be two years before he gets out of 
that. So for the next two years, he can’t take 
advantage of his freedom because he’s tied 
into the Shrine, and he’s the sort of a guy that 
does his job. That’s what I want to duck. 

I was active with the Elks for quite a long 
time. Oh, yes, I went into the Elks in 1925. I 
was asked to join the Elks to be a member of 
their baseball team. And I didn’t take much 
interest in them except to go to their affairs. 
They used to have New Years dances at the 
Elks Club which were real social events. The 
Elks all loved to go there, and there was a 
lot of the top social people of the town were 
there with tables. And they’d dance through 
one, two, three o’clock in the morning. And 
then some of them would go someplace else. 
Well, that died out because they were going 
to go someplace else, and they were going to 
have a cocktail party in their homes previous 
to the dance. So the result was they’d get to 
the dance at ten-thirty or eleven o’clock, pretty 
well plastered, dance around a couple or three 
times, and some’d [say], “Let’s go there, let’s 
go here or the other place,” and they leave. 
And that’s what killed those dances, was these 
cocktail parties previous to the club parties. 
But during the time that they were popular, 
they were very nice affairs. We enjoyed them. 

Then we built up quite an addition to 
the Elks Club, and they put in a steam room, 
and they had a handball court, that sort of 
thing. And for a while, a lot of people were 
interested. They had a golf driving range—you 
know, put up a lot of canvas and you’d drive 
into the canvas, and a teacher, the golf man 
from the Washoe [County course) used to 
come out and have classes. It wasn’t a thing 
that lent itself to tournaments, to large-scale 
participation. And with small groups, it was 


often not possible to have someone to do it 
with you. it died out. 

Then they had some gambling games 
going, of which the house took a rake-off. The 
poker game got out of line so that a couple of 
fellows went broke, lost all their money. So the 
board of directors, they cut that out. 

But that was a phase. There was a big poker 
game, and a lot of fellows went to the club to 
stand around and watch it. And there was a 
big pan game, and they stood around and 
watched that. That pan game, however, went 
on for many years, and it was worth about six 
hundred dollars a month to the Elks Club in 
their rake-off. And nobody particularly went 
broke playing it. They couldn’t lose money 
that fast. It was a good recreation. 

And then there came the time when 
the Elks Club was dying on the vine. The 
membership was dropping. (A fellow who 
has a health store out here, his brother started 
KOH in the basement of the Elks Club. That’s 
something else. Then KOH was first started, 
it was in the basement of the Elks Club.) 
This Exalted Ruler decided that they should 
have a clubhouse that was suitable for their 
activities. And Raymond I. Smith gave them 
a parcel of land out on south Virginia Street, 
I don’t know, two or three acres, I suppose, 
quite a parcel of land. And he proposed that 
they raise some money and build an Elks Club 
and go out after members and make the thing 
a going concern. And Sidney Robinson and 
most all the old-timers here, Cafferata—Oh, 
I’ve forgotten the rest of them, they opposed 
it, saying that, “It’ll never work. Take it out 
there three, four miles from town. It’s silly to 
even dream of it” And a lot of young fellows he 
had—this man had gotten quite an addition 
to the membership by real promotion, just 
went out and manhandled boys to get them in. 

So they got over the vote that they would 
build this club. And they raised the money, I 



Civic and Fraternal Affairs 


163 


suppose as a mortgage on the land, and the 
club, of course, did have quite considerable 
assets of its own at that time. I remember one 
man died and left his entire estate to the Elks 
Club. It was only about $50,- $60,000, but they 
had quite a little sum of money. 

So they built this club, and the membership 
went from about, say, three hundred to 
presently over two thousand. They’re gaining 
a reputation for their food, and they have 
youth activities and bowling, golf, and all 
sorts of things going on for the members. 
Of course, they have card games, and, as of 
right now, they have a tremendous poker 
game going from time to time. But it’s a good 
organization. It’s doing a good job. One of 
the things they used to do—every year, at 
Christmastime, they gathered together, oh, 
coal and hams and bread—all sorts of food, 
and so forth, and lost of coal. During the year, 
they had requests for help for families that 
were in trouble, and they sent Elks out to see 
whether these families were on the level and 
they really needed help, and they reported 
back. I remember one family that asked for 
help, the investigator went out and got down 
under their basement and found that they had 
sacks of onions and potatoes, and all sorts of 
things. And they were asking for more, for 
relief. And I can remember another that I 
went out on with two children, and the house 
had almost no furniture in it. They slept on the 
floor on some kind of pads. The woman and 
the children were not there when I knocked 
on the door. They were at a neighbor’s house. 
They’d gone over there because they wanted 
to get warm. I went in the house and looked 
it over, and they had things for the kids to 
sleep in; I’ve forgotten what they call them, 
but they’re overall garments, you know, from 
head to foot, button down the front. They had 
been washed and were hanging up, drying in 
the kitchen. But it was a pitiful place! They 


didn’t have anything, except those kids were 
going to have most of it, anyhow. Well, they 
got quite a slug of stuff. So along around the 
first of December, we began assembling all of 
the materials for these families, and it would 
cover the basement. They made anything 
from a basket, to a tub to two or three tubs 
of stuff for each family. There were ham and 
potatoes and all sorts of things that could keep 
for a while. There wasn’t refrigeration with 
any of these people, you know. They’d usually 
have a turkey, and then, if they couldn’t cook 
it, they’d take the turkey down to put in—oh, 
[Rauhut] had a bakery over on Commercial 
Row for years and years and years. He’s retired 
now. They’d take them over there and he’d put 
these turkeys in a big oven that went ’round 
and ’round, and he cooked the turkeys for 
them, stuff them and cook them. So that was 
one of the things, and clothing. 

This was all done by members, donating 
their time. It took a month to assemble 
everything and have it checked for the right 
people. And then they got the trucks and 
what have you to deliver it. These people 
didn’t know they were going to get it. And 
I think this was one of the things that really 
appealed to these Elks. They’d go out with a 
big basket of food and clothing and come in 
like a Santa Claus—your eyes pop, you know 
[laughing]. But it was a good thing, and they 
did it for years. 

Then they had Uncle Dan’s dinner at 
Thanksgiving time. Dan Wheeler had started 
this. He’d started this when the Elks Club was 
started. And he said, “We will not be worse 
off for the little we give—,” I’ve forgotten what 
his little statement was, but this was the theme 
of Uncle Dan’s dinner. And they donated 
money, you bought your ticket, all right. 
You paid for the dinner. And then you made 
your donation. And they had an emcee, like 
[George] Vargas, for instance, and Brewster 



164 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Adams, very clever. Each man’s donation was 
read off. They’d start with [George] Wingfield, 
who usually donated $1,500, or something of 
that sort, and they’d go down through the one 
or two five-hundred-dollar donations, and so 
forth, ’till they got down to the hundreds, and 
then the fifties, and the twenty-fives, and the 
tens, and the fives. And it would run up seven, 
eight thousand dollars. This was what they 
used to buy the materials that weren’t donated 
in the Christmas thing, or their charity fund, 
This should not go in here, but [a professor] 
at the University, whose wife died of cancer, 
he had her in St. Mary’s Hospital for I don’t 
know how long. She was dying, and he ran 
out of money completely; he had nothing. 
He couldn’t have nurses, so he taught all day 
and stayed with her all night. And the Elks 
got right busy to help him out, and they got 
in some five or six thousand dollars for him, 
kept him alive and helped him bury her. But 
he would’ve been dead, too, if he hadn’t had 
some help. 

And I remember that this guy, [Francis 
Margate], they didn’t have enough money, 
really, to take care of him, and I knew him 
pretty well. He was speaking to me one day. 
I got the idea that he was trying to work up 
to ask me for some money. So I helped him 
out a little bit, and we got around to it, and he 
needed three hundred dollars so desperately. 
And I gave him the three hundred dollars, 
never expected to see it back at all. 

Well, his wife died, and he retired, and 
he went down and had a little church. He 
was a minister. At the University, he taught 
languages, Arabic, and all kinds of offbeat 
languages. I guess it was two or three years 
later, by God, I got a check for three hundred 
dollars. This refreshes your faith in people. 
The guy had no chance to take care of himself, 
his wife, or anything else. He had no chance 
to pay back the Elks. He couldn’t ever pay 


that five or six thousand dollars back. But this 
was something that’s part of the Elks policy. 
That’s what they get their money for. When 
some deserving case comes along, and it’s 
just impossible, they’re going to come in and 
do something. And if it takes five thousand, 
they’ll go for five thousand. And if it took fifty 
thousand, the chances are they’d get a lot of 
guys to put in some dough and do most of it. 

But to borrow from a private man with no 
guarantee to— he did—he just said, “Thank 
you.” He needed the money. You knew what he 
needed, and all he wanted to do when he got 
it was to get the hell out and use it for what he 
had to do. It was evidently quite urgent, and 
I’d forgotten it. But three years later, back it 
comes, and three hundred dollars must have 
been a terrific sum to him, and there probably 
were others that he was doing it for. 

That was a long thing, and very nice. So 
many things occur to you as you go along that 
you wobble back and forth off here, and off 
there things you’ve forgotten. And they come 
back. A lot of sweet things happened during 
my active membership in the Elks. Today, I 
haven’t been back to the Elks in a long time. 
I went back to a Past Exalted Rulers’ meeting 
the other night, and it was very pleasant. 
Next Thursday, the American Institute of 
Architects is giving me an award as “architect 
emeritus” at a dinner. And I’ll have to make 
them a little speech of some kind, which I 
hate. I just got an award of a Master’s apron 
from the Masons at a special meeting. They 
had the Grand Master of Masons of Nevada 
make the presentation, and it was extremely 
nice. 



15 


A Note About My Daughters 


Now, the girls, they were born in 1924 
and 1925. Ann was first, and Charlotte came 
along a year later. Ann was always rather 
healthy, “e almost lost Charlotte. She couldn’t 
digest food at all. And I can remember we 
lived over on Stevenson Street. (The house is 
gone now. Stevenson Street, I think, is only 
a block long.) Charlotte was crying almost 
all of the time, and it finally got down to the 
point where I took care of Ann and Ruth took 
care of Charlotte. And I’ve, many times, taken 
Ann out and walked up and down the street at 
three or four o’clock in the morning, carrying 
her in order to get away from the noise and get 
her settled down, and get her asleep, because 
Charlotte was just simply one big racket. 

Well, our doctor here (and I’ll not give this 
guy’s name. You knew him. !e was a guy with 
a shriveled arm), when we finally asked him 
what he was doing about Charlotte, and what 
we could do, he had to say, “Well, all I know 
is I give them this (and I forgot what he said 
it was), and if that don’t work, I don’t know 
what to do. He’d’ve let Charlotte die. 


And we changed to a doctor named 
[John] Tees. And Dr. Tees immediately said, 
“Well,” he said, “we will put her on a diet of 
warm milk, and you will stir into that warm 
milk ascorbic acid” (anyhow, it’s a lemon 
derivative). He said, “It takes about twenty 
minutes for it to be absorbed.” So I stirred all 
Charlotte’s feedings for twenty to twenty-five 
minutes. And she simply went to sleep and 
grew like a weed. 

And it develops that what happened was 
that the adding of this acid, or whatever it 
was, helped sort of predigest the food. So she 
began to get nourishment. And she just grew 
like a weed! And as far as I know, ever since 
that time, Charlotte has been in wonderful 
health, as has Ann. 

Ann was the nervous one. when she went 
to work for me in my office, she could hardly 
bring herself to answer the telephone. This 
was talking to a strange person. She had a 
block of some kind against it. And she told 
me just the other day, that while she has no 
trouble at all in talking to anybody—Over the 



166 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


telephone, face to face, or what have you— she 
still has that feeling in the back of her head of 
a little withdrawal from meeting people and 
to talking to strangers, and so forth, in spite 
of the fact that she is expert at it. 

Ann did not go to college. Ann finished 
high school at about the time the war came 
on. That’s when she met her husband, was in 
high school. They fell very deeply in love, and 
when he went to the service, they decided 
they wanted to get married. And I was not 
about to interfere with anything of that sort. 
I could probably do more trouble than good, 
sticking my fingers into that! He went back 
East for his training, and as soon as he could, 
he came back here, and they were married, 
after which he went over on the other side, 
and Ann stayed here, working. 

And I can remember—she lived with 
us—I can remember that, every now and then, 
she would come to a place where she just had 
cabin fever, and she wanted to go someplace 
and do something. So Ann and I would go 
down and do the town. And my wife would 
get from one to three telephone calls the first 
thing the next morning, asking how she was, 
and a nice day, and da da de da, and, “By the 
way, I saw your husband last night, da de da.” 
She got told. Every time that Ann and I went 
downtown, Ruth got a message, never missed, 
which goes to show you that when you live 
in a small town like Reno, you have to be a 
decent guy, or you’re in trouble [laughing]. 

Well, Bill came back from the war, and 
Ann and Bill had a few ups and downs there 
for a while. Bill had gone into a sporting goods 
store, selling all kinds of sporting goods, 
which was a natural for him, because that 
was his bent, was fishing and hunting, and 
so forth. And he didn’t make that very well. 
I’ve forgotten why. It wasn’t because he didn’t 
work. Also, he wanted to be a writer. He went 
to the University for a short time with the idea 


that he would come out as a writer. I think 
that, today, his broadcasts over TV are fairly 
erudite, and good language, and so forth. He 
might have made a writer. Anyhow, he got 
into the Fish and Game Commission setup, 
and this was a natural for Bill. And he’s been 
there ever since, and I think he’s well up in it 
now. He’s in, I guess, public [information]—I 
don’t know, advertising—something of the 
sort, for the Fish and Game. He’s not out in 
the country anymore. He has a desk job. And 
I think that his retirement is in sight, and that 
it will be a fairly good one. 

Ann, then—I don’t know how she got to 
working with Russ McDonald. She left us, 
and she might have gone to work for him 
then. Anyhow, she and Bill moved to Carson. 
And immediately, they got into the church. 
Ann started playing the organ a little bit and 
began to have friends such as they never had 
in Reno. They didn’t have money to entertain, 
and they were just a family, living all by 
themselves. They didn’t have much to do at 
all with anybody, except us. When they got 
down in Carson, Ann told me that she never 
again would live in a larger city, that she was 
somebody down there, that she had friends, 
and she was included in the things that they 
did, and she was very happy. And I think that, 
today, that is still the case, that they both love 
Carson, very happy with living there. 

Ann became Mr. McDonald’s secretary 
and became, also, the head of the department 
under him, to the point where she became 
declassified. She’s not in Civil service any 
more. And shortly—some short time ago, I 
believe that she was appointed as his deputy, 
that she is now, definitely, under him the top 
person in that department. 

I’m just so proud of that kid! I think that’s 
a wonderful thing. Because she didn’t have a 
college education to go. She did that on her 
own, and she did it with quite a few handicaps, 



A Note on My Daughters 


167 


too. And one of the handicaps, of course, 
was her nervous temperament, which she 
has pretty well conquered, and with Bill, her 
husband, who is a rather easy-going, big guy, 
and she can put her head on his shoulders and 
just calm right down like nobody’s business. 
I think it’s a beautiful thing they’ve got! Very 
nice. 

Charlotte went to college. She was a Tri- 
Delt. Her mother was a Pi Phi, but Charlotte’s 
friends all went Tri Delt, and we wouldn’t 
want her to go any place but where her 
friends went, so she became a Tri-Delt. She 
was a math major. She has a very fine mind; 
it’s an academic mind. She’s not one to go 
out on the market and buy stocks and bonds 
and hurly-burly, and one thing and another. 
Charlotte is a wonderful character, too. She 
has a fine mind. 

And she married to an up and coming 
chap, Johnny Carter, who was well on his way 
to good jobs when he decided that he would 
tell his company where he was going to work, 
instead of the company telling him where he 
was going to work. He would come to see me. 
And also, he started as a manager for this local 
company, the name of which I never have 
been able to spell or pronounce. It has to do 
with gases of various kinds, oxygen—. It was 
called the Sierra Oxygen Company, I believe, 
at the time. But it also dealt in various other 
types of gas. 

He began to go to these conventions 
as the representative of his company, on 
expense, with instructions to entertain certain 
people, and what have you. This drinking and 
entertaining was not exactly Charlotte’s thing. 
She didn’t fit into that as well as he would have 
liked her to. And naturally, as time went on, 
he became more and more social, and she 
became a little bit less social, and there was 
where the rift began to come between them. 
He felt that he was unable to pull her out of 


this “groove” that she was in, and what have 
you. And they had,! think, quite an unhappy 
time, although he was a good provider. He got 
their present home well started while they 
were married. But he finally pulled away and 
got a divorce. 

And it developed that he left Charlotte, 
just about, with nothing, and that his health 
insurance was cancelled when he left the 
company. And she had no insurance, even. 
And that girl got down to where she got quite 
sick, and she had to have an operation. Her 
car was on the blink, and this is the first time 
Charlotte ever told me that she didn’t have 
plenty of money, that everything was all right 
and that she was going to just go right along. 
That kid’s got courage, too, lots of it! Just like 
her mother. 

So Charlotte called me up one day, and 
she said that she had to have an operation, 
and that she had to put the money down 
to the hospital if she was going to get in. I 
know she hated that worse than poison. And 
I took her a couple thousand dollars, and she 
got her operation, and she got her car fixed, 
and what have you. And from there on, she, 
without ever talking to me again about money, 
or asking for any kind of money—oh, except 
I cancelled some debts; they’d gone into a 
service station, bought a service station, and 
We’d helped them with that. We cancelled that 
out. But she never asked me for anything. And 
today, she has remarried, and he is a guy who 
likes the kind of life that Charlotte likes to live, 
and this doesn’t mean running around and 
entertaining and drinking, and so forth. They 
have a family life and it’s very nice. And she is 
well on her way to happiness and contentment 
and to a retirement pay that will take care 
of her old age.She feels that everything is all 
right. Of course, I think probably I’ll be able 
to help her out when I decide to kick off and 
go to Nirvana, or wherever I’m going. 



168 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


These two gals, both of them, have 
excellent minds, and they should have, when 
you think of their mother. Charlotte, by 
the way, came within a fraction of a point 
winning the gold medal when she graduated 
from college. Besides having the courage 
and that sort of thing, Charlotte is [a] lovely 
person in a way that Ann isn’t. Ann is quite 
practical, and Ann has heard what’s going on 
and who did it to who and why for so many 
years that she has one attitude toward life, rid 
Charlotte, never having been in that sort of a 
situation, has another attitude. And Charlotte 
is just a plain, lovely character, but she’s never 
going to get her sword out of the scabbard 
and go campaigning anyplace. Ann is—oh, 
she searches for the reason things happened 
a little bit, a very brilliant gal, a very fine 
character, substantial. So those are two gals. 
You bet, they’re good kids! 



16 


Conclusion 


Actually, I don’t think I have any philosophy 
at all, as such. I can remember—to get to 
religion, I’ve discussed religion a little bit with 
you, that I saw the ministers in the pulpit, and I 
saw them in their private life, and the fact that 
these people have families, they have wives 
to give a little fun to, and they have children 
to educate, and they must, necessarily, look 
to their financial welfare. And when they do 
that—sometimes, I have heard [W. D.] Trout, 
for instance (Trout was the [laughing] name 
of a minister),’ talking about his sermon and 
saying, “I’d better not say that because Joe 
Doakes will be there, and he wouldn’t like It. 
He’s a pretty good contributor.” So there’s a 
coloring of your teaching and of your ministry 
due to divided loyalties. Probably, this is one 
of the reasons that the Catholic church refuses 
to let their priests marry. They then don’t have 
this disturbing issue on the side of children to 
take care of and a wife to support, and clothes, 
and what have you. This is a pretty big side 
issue, too. 

Now, there are other ministers I have 
known, such as John T. Ledger of the Episcopal 


church, who, I think was a thoroughly 
dedicated humanitarian as well as a minister, 
He recognized a combination of religious 
beliefs and of human needs, and what have 
you, that weren’t exactly like some “dedicated” 
men that read the book and threw it at you. 
And then we were married by a minister in the 
Episcopal church out in Sparks, a rather young 
fellow; he and his wife have three children. 
I met them at a party, too, socially. And he 
gave up his ministry and went up to St. Mary’s 
Hospital to work with the underprivileged 
or the older people up there in the nursing 
home, and what have you. His wife happens 
to be dedicated along this sane line. So they, 
as a man and wife, will probably do all right, 
unless she gets tired of it after a while, or 
they both do. But when it comes to educating 
their children, they’ll have to have some help 
from someplace, and I suppose that along 
the road, people like that sometimes run into 
angels who appreciate what they’re doing and 
who contribute in some way to see to it that 
the needs are supplied. And, of course, these 
people then say that “the Lord provided.” 



170 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


But this, again, it’s people. I have little 
incidents in my life that have remained with 
me. I’ve told you of one, of the old woman, 
big, fat old lady (Hansen was her name) that 
I took silk stockings and panties, and stuff 
like that to her (Ruth bought them for her), 
and newspapers, and that sort of thing, rather 
frequently. She was on old age pension. And 
she had a little bit of a house, one room and 
a kitchen, a shack, you might call it, and this 
very small lot with a couple of fruit trees on 
it that her husband had left her in some way. 
And the old age pension people were figuring 
on taking that away from her and putting her 
in some state-owned facility. She was having 
that fight on her hands. 

But when I took these things to her, it 
wasn’t the stockings which she needed, or the 
underwear which she needed and couldn’t 
buy, it was sitting down—putting my feet up 
and sitting down in her chair. She only had 
one chair, great big thing that fitted her, and 
there were a couple stools around. I had to 
sit in her chair, put my feet up. And then, it 
was the conversation, the talking, the contact 
with somebody who seemed to be a little 
bit simpatico for her. This was bigger than 
anything that I brought her. Bringing her the 
little presents was just the reason for being 
there. The conversation, that was the meat. 
And she loved it! And she swore like a mule 
driver! I’ll never forget her. 

I know, there was another incident like 
this that had impressed me. it was in going 
from Elko to Winnemucca, up over the 
mountain road. There was a mining camp 
called Midas, I think it was. And a woman 
there ran a boardinghouse for the mine. And 
we were always making the trip at night. 
I was supervising work in both Elko and 
Winnemucca. We’d stop there, and usually 
around two o’clock in the morning, she’d get 


up and cook us breakfast and cook us a meal. 
And then, she’d sit down across the table 
and put, plunk her two elbows down on the 
table and put her cheek in her hands and say, 
“Now, tell me!” Now, she wanted to hear the 
gossip from Elko and from Winnemucca, 
particularly any dirty little gossip that we 
had. She loved scandal. And, of course, we 
told that dear old lady some pretty tall lies 
[laughing]. But this was the important thing, 
communication with some people, something 
that she couldn’t have, couldn’t get. She didn’t 
have newspapers, didn’t have a radio. So when 
we came in, it was like a breath of the outside. 
These things, and many more like it, have 
impressed me with people. 

Then, too, this business of religion. 
Always, I have thought of a god who was far 
bigger than this little world of ours, of a god 
that did not watch over me personally, as some 
people feel. Religions taught this. This, also, I 
thought, that in teaching that there was help 
available through God, and that by going to 
church and making yourself acceptable to 
God [laughing], you might get some help 
when you needed it; this is the basis of a great 
deal of churchgoing throughout the centuries. 
The thought of life hereafter—I could never 
conceive of a life hereafter sponsored by a god 
such as people are wont to think of, that did 
not apply to all life, and that has not applied 
to all life since the beginning of the world. 
And this leads to a pretty well populated 
place, [laughing] if there was a life hereafter, 
you might go up there and get chased by a 
dinosaur, and probably scalped by an Indian, 
and have some old-time Viking want to run 
you through with a sword. So this didn’t make 
any sense to me. 

And then, in thinking about other planets 
and the possibility of their being inhabited 
and their having a life hereafter (it was 



Conclusion 


171 


probably the same place), this would be a 
pretty confusing sort of a joint [laughing]. 

So I couldn’t quite see that. Nor could I 
understand how, we’ll say—take the Hindus, 
with their belief that they can sit and gradually 
divest themselves of all earthly cares, and 
so forth, until they become just a beautiful 
thought [laughing]. And then they’re going 
to go to Nirvana, which is their heaven. 
Now, what would the Lord, who was a doer, 
absolutely nothing but a doer of things, how 
could He countenance having some guy that 
sat on his fanny all his life, coming up and 
sitting down in His heaven? [laughing] 

Well, these are silly little thoughts. 
But nevertheless, they’re all part of what I 
gradually, I think, have come to. I cane to the 
point (and this was while Ruth was alive, too) 
when I felt perhaps I had reached the peak of 
my life in physical development, and so forth, 
that there would be a gradual decline. And I 
began to wonder what I had, what preparation 
I have made for a. life hereafter, if there was 
such a thing, what preparation I’d made for 
death, actually. As I thought of all these things 
I’m telling you, they’re just—there’s no basis 
for them. There’s no fact behind these things. 
I had nothing solid. 

And I, too, then, began to wonder where I 
was going to find, perhaps, a bunch of people 
who had beliefs that I could accept. And that’s 
when I turned to Masonry. T. thought of the 
Masons. I thought, I’ll join the Masons and 
see what they have.” So I joined the Masons. 
And I saw, in the Masons, a great deal of 
religion in its ceremonials, and so forth, and 
uses of quotations from the Bible in its work, 
initiatory work, and that sort of thing. 

But I saw there some of the most beautiful, 
little human things, the—not giving—and I 
want to talk about giving before I get through. 
I don’t believe in giving. Not giving, but 


helping someone to help himself, giving a 
little, of course, to get started, whatever it 
might be. 

We had trials of Masons who had slipped 
out of the groove, and I watched Masons who 
were accused by, perhaps, people that didn’t 
like them. Perhaps the accusations were 
badly colored. They were accused of things 
that were non-Masonic, and they had to be 
tried to see whether they would be thrown 
out of the Masons or not. Usually, this had 
to do with family matters. And I saw some of 
these fellows come up with the most beautiful 
character, men that had been accused of 
things. And perhaps they were in the wrong. 
They may have done what they were accused 
of. And they stood up there like men and 
told about their case and why it happened, 
and what they felt about it. And I want to tell 
you, they were damn fine Masons! I saw quite 
a lot of that in my years of going through the 
chairs of the Masonry. 

I remember in Mount Rose Lodge, they 
would have a recess called, and everybody’d 
run out and buy a bottle of coke from a 
machine. And I’ve seen the boys get up from 
their chairs to go out and get their coke, and 
start crisscrossing across the hail to the two 
doors. And this guy meets this guy, and he 
comes in; here’re three fellows, and they don’t 
pass one another. They all stop, yak, yak, yak, 
and they’re yakking away. I saw seven—and 
I counted them, because I was interested in 
this—seven little groups of men, two to three 
to four, that had stopped momentarily to pass 
the time of day and say something to each 
other, and they didn’t know each other well, 
probably. They were Masons together. They 
saw each other in Lodge, and they might 
see each other in private life a bit. But seven 
groups weren’t all close friends. This was just a 
stop to say hello. And it was rather nice. Now, 



172 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


I liked it. This was just another illustration of 
the kind of thing that is shaping the belief that 
I have finally come to. 

And I guess that’s all there is to say 
now, is that I think (and I think I’ve said 
this before to you) that we are born with 
everything it takes for us to go through 
life. We can look back—let’s say we look 
back a hundred years in this country. The 
people who are born today at birth must be 
almost precisely like the people at birth in 
those days. In the matter of when they’re 
normal, healthy people, they’ve got about 
the same size brain, the same physical and 
mental makeup. A hundred years ago, we 
had—oh, even two hundred years ago, start 
back there. They’re the same people. We had 
even witchcraft, and that sort of thing, tie 
had all kinds of beliefs, today, we have men 
with the same capacities at birth who know 
about planets, how to get to them. Their 
technologies are tremendous as compared 
with the technologies of these same people 
two hundred years ago, or a hundred years 
ago. They haven’t reached any kind of a 
limit of what they might be able to do with 
education and training—no limit whatever. 
So I think that we are born with everything 
we need, and that when we sit down and 
pray for help, the only thing we can do, and 
the only thing we can expect, is that we may 
put ourselves in a better mood. We may 
give ourselves a little confidence. We may 
put ourselves in a better way of thinking to 
accomplish the thing that we’re asking for 
help for. Well, I think we do it with what we 
have been given to do with. 

And I believe that my life, since—well, 
since the Depression—I think I tried to 
explain to you that the Depression was a 
dividing point in my life from a wild kid to a 
guy who went to work and tried to do things 
right. I think that my life has been made very 


beautiful with the things that I have been able 
to do to help people help themselves. 

Now, as an architect, I could be an arbitrary 
dictator on jobs. And we build a building, 
so we have a contractor who’s a general 
contractor, and we have a subcontractor for 
masonry, for electrical work, for plumbing 
work, and painting, and on down. He’s 
got perhaps a dozen people whom he has 
contracted with on the basis of the contract 
that he signs with my client. And I am 
supposed to stand between this contractor 
and his subcontractors, and this contractor 
and his owner as an interpreter of these 
documents that I prepared for the owner. I say, 
“This is what—there is a question. You think 
it means this, he thinks it means this, but this 
is what it meant. I prepared it. I know. So,” I 
say, “this is what it meant.” I have to soften 
that sometimes, because one man, the owner, 
is giving the contractor the business, or the 
contractor is giving the owner the business, 
or a sub is giving the contractor a bad time. 

The result was that I gradually came 
to a feeling that my job was to make this 
job run smoothly and to be built as it was 
intended to be built as rapidly as possible 
and for the money available to build it, and 
that in so doing, I had to take these various 
disagreements, which all stemmed from 
money (these men were in the job for money), 
and that’s where I finally got to the little saying 
I have here, “You look for the money, and 
you’ll find the trouble.” A man is going to lose 
his profit and some of his money on the job, 
he is going to try and cut some corners. Now, 
my job is to say, “I want it done the way it was 
designed, but there are possibilities of a little 
give and take every place.” 

And if you can, with this man who is 
angry, we’ll say, and has been fighting with 
his contractor and doesn’t want to lose the 
money, or can’t even afford to lose the money, 



Conclusion 


173 


if you can soften this a little bit, a little give 
from above for a little give from below, pretty 
soon this man stops fighting the situation, 
and starts thinking about the situation, and 
he begins to find maybe he can work this out 
a little better. He can save a little here, he can 
speed up a little here. And he finds that he 
can do something about it, besides my having 
given a little bit. He gets over this block he has. 
And he finds out he can do something about 
it, and suddenly, he goes ahead. And I have 
a friend. He thinks I did something for him. 
I didn’t do much for him. All I did was just 
open a door a little bit, and he did the rest of 
it. I did a lot of that. 

The result was that I have so many friends 
among the contractors—oh, Camille Solari, 
for instance. I can still hear Camille Solari, 
and he does it every time he gets into a 
bunch of people and starts talking, “When 
this guy says, ‘Do something,’ you better do 
it!” [laughing] Yet, he doesn’t mean it that 
way, that I’m going to make people do it. I’m 
going to get it done. I have to get it done. And 
sometimes, of course, there comes a time 
when you stand down on your two feet and 
say, “This is it.” And whoever wants to battle 
about it gets up and battles. You do the best 
you can. And you lose some of those battles, 
too, because you may be right, but it may 
not be the best thing to do for all concerned. 
And many times, the best thing to do for all 
concerned, even if it involves a little illegality, 
or something of the sort, gets done. And 
sometimes, this is the best thing, too. 

So, this, for fifty years, was a gradually 
increasing Viewpoint, that I had to give 
help to people so they could do the thing 
they needed to do. And. now that. I’m out of 
business, I have so many really nice things 
happen to me in little words of praise and little 
words of pleasure, it seems, and whatever, 
by people, because I almost have no one left 


[laughing] that I did dirt to [laughing]! And 
I think, right now, the only Philosophy of 
living that I could say I have is a philosophy of 
circulating among my friends and the people 
I Come in contact with ease and with pleasure 
and with a little help here if I can do it. But in 
all cases, a nice, serene, easy association with 
people. Because if there weren’t people, we 
wouldn’t have religion, or we wouldn’t be on 
the moon, we wouldn’t do anything. All we’ve 
got in this world’s people, and what they can 
do. And there’s no limit to what they can do, 
if they are freed in their heads to do it. But 
we’re not freed in our heads. 

All of us have lives with parents, with 
schools, and early associates, and we are 
formed along some kind of a groove which 
sort of stays with us, and is perhaps difficult, 
like keeping your head down in a golf awing is 
rather difficult to break out of. SO you have all 
kinds of people, and you have so many people 
who privately recognize faults, wish they 
could get over some of the things that they 
constantly do, people in whom you would 
find considerable beauty of thought if you 
could reach it. But they’re covered up with a 
sort of a front that is the product of early life, 
and that sort of thing. 

Take my early life with my parents. I 
suppose that my mother was a churchgoer 
in her early days. But she got well over going 
to church. Dad never went to any church for 
any reason at all. So I did not have an early 
bringing-up with a religious background. And 
this way be responsible, too, for part of my 
feeling that orthodoxy does not offer much 
for me. My parents also didn’t—. My father 
never took me fishing, or any of that sort of 
thing. He went fishing. He never took me 
with him. And his idea of being good to me 
was when he had money, he’d give me four or 
five dollars, and he’d done a pretty good deal. 
And it wasn’t until he was practically on his 



174 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


last legs that he said to me one night, “I never 
knew thee before.” Well, we didn’t know each 
other. My mother, as long as Father was alive, 
she was fathers wife in the strictest old-time 
sense, “tat he did, she did. What he thought, 
she took. Whether she thought it or not, she 
went along, I guess. And it wasn’t until she 
came to live with me (she was with me eight 
years) that I really began to know my mother. 
SO I didn’t have a family background. I just 
was untamed, almost, damn fool. 

And then in making my own way in life, 
you come up against so many things that 
put you on the defensive. And the first thing 
you know, you are bulling your way through 
your friends, and your life, and everything 
else, without giving thought that you should 
to what you’re doing and what’s happening. 
I think that I had quite a bit of that in my 
early days. And I was always a “take charge” 
guy. And I think that was possibly the reason 
I was a “take charge” guy. I didn’t want 
anybody telling me anything. I was going 
to tell people. So when I joined the Legion, 
I became commander of my post. I became 
district commander. I could have been state 
commander if I had wanted to go on with it, 
I think. It would have entailed an election. I 
don’t know whether I’d’ve won or not, but I 
think I could have. When I went in the Elks, 
I became the Exalted Ruler of the Elks. When 
I went into the Masons, I became Master 
of my lodge. When I went to the Uniform 
Building Code Association, the International 
Association of Building Officials, I became a 
member of their board of directors almost 
immediately and was president for two years. 
That’s the kind of a guy I always was. I had to 
take charge. 

I am well over taking charge now. I’m 
perfectly willing to go along. And I am not so 
critical, and not so ready to believe what one 
man says about another any more because I 


have seen so many nice things in people that 
I could have hated, people that I could have 
said were no good, that were bums. And 
yet, underneath there someplace, at some 
time, there pops up a very nice thing. And 
it happens with a great many people. That’s 
not philosophy, but that’s the way I think I 
am now. I don’t see any need for being any 
different. 

The people around me have been—oh, 
they’ve been so nice. They’ve been so nice 
to Bunny. She has a large number of friends. 
And she is affectionately thought of. There are 
some of the younger people around that feel 
that she is—oh, she “puts on” an attitude of 
some kind, that she’s too effusive. That’s the 
way she is. And it is sincere. It comes from 
the heart. One lady told me that Bunny was 
not her cup of tea.” And the reason that she 
said that, I’m quite sure, is because you say 
something to Bunny, and she’s going to come 
right back at you with a big smile, and she’s 
going to jump up all as though this was a very 
illuminating and wonderful thing you’ve said, 
and how about some more of it, and so forth. 
It’s natural. She’s a beautiful character, really is. 

Ruth, my [first] wife, was more serene, 
easier, just as unassuming, but she gave you 
her full attention, didn’t care who you were 
or what you were talking about. She gave you 
her attention and heard what you had to say, 
and she came back with something that was 
agreeable to your point of view, unless it was 
a necessity for her point of view to help you, 
or something of that sort. But she was the 
more even-dispositioned. But another very, 
very beautiful thing, and a most respectful 
attitude to all people. Criticism was almost 
unknown to her. She was undoubtedly 
criticized, but I don’t remember criticism on 
her part. I do remember her always attentive 
and respectful attitude toward all people. 
And particularly, I remember, when we got 



Conclusion 


175 


to talking about almost anything, her crystal 
clear expressions of her thoughts, and her 
good, solid thoughts—not details so much, 
but the basic, the fundamental of the thing 
she was talking about, she was so Lid. And her 
expressions, as I say, were—it was beautiful to 
hear her talk—lovely character, oh, a lovely 
character! 

How I ever got into marriage with two 
such women, I’ll never know—just lucky, I 
guess [laughing]. 

I don’t know anything else to say. I’ve 
talked and talked and talked. I’ve thought of 
a lot of things I haven’t thought of in years in 
making these talks. In laying awake at nights, 
I have thought of things which I should have 
told you, but which I’ve forgotten, that I 
thought might be interesting. There’s so many 
things that have gone on, so many things that 
have influenced my thinking and my actions, 
so many of these for the better, too, that have 
been almost taken for granted, that—this is a 
good thing, now. I’ll do this from now on. But 
how it came about has slipped my mind, So 
whatever I am, as of now, as a retired man, I 
am, I hope, a gentleman who loves the people 
who are around him. 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



178 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Adams, Brewster, 358 
Allen, Robert A., 92 
Alpha Tau Omega [ATO], 

37 

American Association 
of Building Officials, 
324 

American Institute of 
Architects [AIA], 22, 
170, 216, 240-242, 360 
American Iron and Steel 
Institute, 107 
American Legion, 327- 
331, 332-333, 334, 380 
American Standards 

Association, 104, 106 


B 


Bacon, Ted, 47, 

Baker, Bud, 124 
Balzar, Fred B., 

Barrett and Hilp 
tractors], 

Barton, Horae 
47, 49, 50 

Bath, Clarence K., 126 
Bell Telephone Company 
of Nevada, 177-180 
Billinghurst, B. D., 

school (Reno), 112-113, 
W49-150, 271-272 
Blaney, Catherine, 30, 80 
Bonanza Club, 118 
Boudwin, talker, 126 
Boulder Dam, 84-85 
Bowen, Grant, 195 
Bruner, Elmo, 232, 237 
Building Officials' Con¬ 
ference of America 
tBOCA], 98, 102 
Burke, Charles, 95-96 



Cafferata, Harold, 346- 
347, 355 

Campbell, 'to., 81 
Carson, Kit, 11, 12 
Carson City Planning 
Board, 120 
Carter, John, 365 
Caton, Al, 89 
Centennial Coliseum, 130- 
131, 134 

Chase, Ray E. "Dopey," 7 
Chevrolet car "Baby Grand," 
60 

Chinese, 1, 5, 55-56 
Christian Science^l8, 30 
Cladianos Building (Reno), 
62, 291 
and Sons, 291 
74 

bottling plant 
172-174 

Hal, 105, 106, 


Springs, Colorado, 
19 

Department, U. S., 


Communists, 335 
Congressional Record, 332 
Cooper, John A., 131, 246, 
310 

Cotton Club (Boston, Massa¬ 
chusetts) , 114 


Darrell Dunkle Post No. 1, 
American Legion, 327 
de Longchamps, Fred, 59, 

61, 79-80 

Delta Delta Delta sorority, 
365 

De Paoli, Harry, 299 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


179 


Depression (U. s.), 84, 
245, 310, 375 
Dillard, J. C. "Joe," 
80, 307, 310 
Doten, Goodwin, 8, 9 
Dunkle, Dan, 327 
Dunkle, Darrell, 327 


Edison, Thomas, 54 

Education building (new), 
UNR, 167 

Egan, George, 92 

El Cortez hotel (Reno), 
183, 258, 262, 264, 

265, 266 

Elko-Lamoille Power Com- 
oany, 55 

Elks lodge [BPOE], 353- 
360, 380 

Engle, Hal, 191, 313 

Erskine, Graham, 139, 
167-168, 184, 185, 186, 
187, 258, 312, 314 


Farr, jCtfrtis, 352-353 
Federal Bureau of Inves¬ 
tigation [FBI], 109 

X ederal Housing Adminis¬ 
tration [FHA], 104, 

107 

Ferris and Erskine, 185 
Ferris, Doris Mary Hamm, 
1, 17, 25-32, 379 
Ferris, F.dith, 10, 19, 
20-21 

Ferris, Edward, 2, 17, 

19 

Ferris, Edward Oscar, 

26 

Ferris, Frances Canby, 

22 

Ferris, George A., 4, 8, 
10-16, 18-19, 21, 25- 
27, 67-69, 76, 82-83, 
84, 138, 148, 379 


Ferris, Katherine, 10, 

19, 20-21 

Ferris, Ruth Miller, 

105, 107, 108, 116, 

339, 340, 346, 365, 

367, 369, 372, 381- 
382 

Ferris, Ruthmarion s. 
"Bunny," 5, 351, 352, 
380-381 

Fire Underwriters of the 
Pacific, Board, 125- 
126 

First National Bank of 
Nevada, 139, 170 
Fish and Game Commission, 
Nevada state, 363 
Fits, Bert, 139, 18SL 
Fitzgerald, Lincoln, 117 
Fitzpatrick Baking Com- 
paw'tQakiand, Califor¬ 
nia), 198-206 
|^c]S^<^Fred, 86 
Roland, 81 
l, Henry, 54 
et 8, 327 
Frandsen, Frank, 91 
Frohlich, August, 92, 

128, 131 


Galli, Mr., 34 

Garden of the Gods (Colo¬ 
rado) , 2 

General Services Adminis¬ 
tration [GSA], 144 

Gladding [and] McBean, 

291 

Glass, Alton E., 43 

Golden, Frank, 7 

Golden Rule Store (Reno), 
246 

Golden State Plastering 
Company, 61 

Governor's mansion, 67- 
68 

Granada Theater (Reno), 

69 



180 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Gray-Reid- T vright' s 
(store), 33, 46 
Greathouse, George, 138 
Grosbeck, Ted, 84, 137 


Hamm, 

Hamm, 

Hamm, 

26 

Hamm, 
Hamm, 
Hamm, 
Hamm, 
Hamm, 
Hamm, 
Hamm, 
Hamm, 
Hamm, 
27, 


H 

Alice, 26 
Edward, 26 
Francis [Frank], 


Fred, 26 
George, 26 
Harmon, 26 
Ida Marion, 26 
Jeremiah, 1, 25 
Jeremiah, 26 
Jesse, 26 
Susanna, 26 
Susannah Brown, 

29 

Harold's Club (Reno), 
191-192, 274 
Harrington, Scott 
"Scotty," 329-330, 

331 

Hartman, Leon 
39 

Haseman 
43 

ft Z., 344 
George C. 

45 

., Charles, 91, 92 
Hitler, Adolph, 21 
Holcomb, Frnest, 36 
Holiday motels, 240, 

260 

Hug, Procter High 
School, 166, 181 
Hursh, Vern, 328 


Indians, 3 

Industrial Workers of 
the World [IWW] , 55 


International Association 
of Building Officials, 
31, 110, 380 

See also: Uniform 
Building Code 
International Association 
of Theatrical Stage 
Employees [IATSE], 264 


James, Charlotte Ferris, 
22, 361-367 

Johnson, Axel, 344-346, 
350 

Johnson, 

Johnson, Ole, 

41 

Jones, 

Jus 


’Rags," 



Kwapil, Richard 0., 344 


Las Vegas, Nevada, 

73, 76, 78 

Las Vegas High School, 

309 

Ledger, John T., 368-369 
Legislative office build¬ 
ing (Carson City^, 166- 
167, 186-187 

Leisure Hour Club (Carson 
City), 41 

Loforth, Art, 87, 88 
Longnecker, Buddy, 194 
Lundberg, Alben, 15 
Lunt, Alfred, 165 


Me 

McCreary, George, 43 
McDonald, Mr. 56, 57 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


181 


McDonald, Joseph E., 45 
McDonald, Russell, 364 
McEwen, Dan, 26 
McKim, Mead, and White, 
architects (New York 
City), 254 


M 


Maestretti, A. J., 196- 
197 

Maqic Circle, 344-350 
Malone, George W. 

"Molly," 84, 330-331 
Marconi school (San 

Francisco, California), 
47-48 

Marks, Ray, 118-119 
Mashburn, Gray, 138 
Masons, 339-342, 360, 
373-374, 380 
Mast, Clyde, 126 
Master Plumbers Associa¬ 
tion of Reno, 96-97 
Mexicans, 12 
Midas, Nevada, 60- 
Mount Rose 
(Reno), 


Lto, 21 


National Council of 
Architectural Regis¬ 
tration Boards [NCARB], 
208, 213, 216, 219, 

220, 228-229, 230-237, 
239, 240 

National Guard, 141-143 

National Lumber Manufac¬ 
turers Association, 94, 
109-110 

Nevada Art Gallery, Inc,, 
342-344 

Nevada Club, 117 


Nevada Hills mine, 56 
Nevada Highway Depart¬ 
ment, 85-89, 91-92 
Nevada Industrial Com¬ 
mission [NIC], 318, 320 
Nevada State Board of 
Architecture, 208-227 
paesim. 

Nevada State Journal, 331 
Nevada State Planning 
Board, 184-185, 186 
Nevada State Prison, 68 
New England Building 
Code, 98 


Oddie, Tasl 


Grove, California, 



, Clarence 
Joseph, 233 
Painters Union, 82 
Parkway Hotel (Reno), 266 
Payne, Gustavus Swift, 37 
Penitentes, 3 
Penney, J. C. Company 
store (Reno), 187-190 
Penry, N. Raymond, 46 
Perkins, Mr., 208-209 
Peterson, Edward C., 85, 

86 

Phi Delta Tau, 36, 37 
Phi Beta Phi sorority, 

365 

Pierce, Mr., 49, 50 
Pine, Edward, 340 
Pioneer Theater Auditorium 
(Reno), 134, 170 
Plaster and Cement Masons' 
Union, 82, 83, 295-296 
Plumbers and Fitters 
Union, 95, 295, 297 



182 


Ferris A. “Monk” Lehman 


Polk, Willis, 138 
Prohibition, 137 
Prospectors Club (Reno), 
350-351 


Q 

Quests, Ed, 139 


Rose, Louie, 43 
Ross, Earl, 43, 44 
Ross, Emily Coffin, 46 
Ross, Silas E., 45, 46 
Ryeberg and Sorenson 
[contracting firm], 
71 


S 


Rauhut, Hugh A., 357 

Regents, University of 
Nevada, 185 

Regional Planning Com¬ 
mission, Washoe 
County, 120 

See also: Variance 
Board, Reno; Reno 
Planning Board; 
Sparks Planning 
Board; Reno Board 
of Appeals 

Reno Board of Appeals 
124, 126 
Reno City Council, 121 [- 

128 VVV / 

Reno 
Nev 
163 

Reno High School (II), 
150-163, 164-165, 312 

Reno Planning Board, 
118-120, 133 

Reno Press Brick Company 
(Reno), 262 

Rialto Theater (Reno), 

69 

Riegelhuth, Katharine, 

38 

Robinson, Sidney, 355 

Rockwell and Sutton (con 
tractinq firm], 73 

Rollins, Ann Ferris, 19, 
22, 361-367 

Rollins, William "Rill," 
362-364 




St. Mary's Hospital 

(Reno), 130, 138, 139, 
170-171, 267, 369 
St. Mary's in the Moun¬ 
tains Church (Virginia 
City, Nevada), 148 
Savage and Son, Inc. 

(Reno), 15V\. Yi 
Savage, Leonard C.^151 
Saviers, Harry, 15, 67 
Schmidt, Leo, 349, 350 
Scrugham, James G., 55, 

56, 327-328, 329, 331 
Seitz, "Chump," 8 
Seltzer, Dick, 75 
Seraphine, Sister, 138- 
139 

Shrine (A. A, Order of 
the Nobles of the 
Mystic Shrine), 341, 

353 

Sierra Pacific Power Com¬ 
pany, 174 
Sigma Alpha, 36 
Smith, Raymond I., 355 
Solari, Camille, 377 
Southern Building Code, 

98, 102, 324 
Southern Building Offi¬ 
cials Conference, 324 
Sparks Planning Board, 

120 

Stadtherr, Anthony Louis, 
58 

State Building (Reno), 79- 
82, 306, 307-308 
Stead Air Force Base 
(Nevada), 145-147 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


183 


Sullivan, Daniel, 117 
Sumnerfield, Sardis, 194- 
195, 198 


Talmadge, Harry R. 

"Chink," 36 
Taylor, Jock, 78 
Tees, John, 361-362 
Thompson, Bruce, 297 
THPO, 36 

Travis, Jot, Student 
Union building, 184- 
185 

Trinidad, Colorado, 3-4 
Trout, W. D., 368 


U 


Uniform Building Code, 
94-95, 97, 98-103, 
104-114, 119, 136 
Unions (trade), 77, 2, 

301, 315 

See also: Painters' 
Union; Plaster and 
Cement Masons' Union; 
Plumbers' and 
Fitters * Union 
United Veterans, 327 
University of Nevada, 35- 
46, 335-336, 338-339, 
343 


3 



w 


Wagner, Bill, 60 
Walker, Tom, 41-42 
Ward, William "Bill," 68, 
79 

Washoe County Bank, 310 
Washoe County Hospital, 

69 

Wells, Nevada, 73-75 
Western Asbestos Company 
(San Francisco), 308 
Western Association of 
Architectural Registra¬ 
tion Boards, 219-220, 
226, 238-239 
Wheeler, Dan, 357 
White, Earl Company (con¬ 
tracting firm), 73 
Williams, Al, 86, 87-89 
WilliamsKyern, 64, 65 
“^rey, E. E., 8 

[field, George, 358 
Srs, T. L. "Ted," 
28-329 

Wooster, Earl, 73, 169 
Wooster, Earl High School 
(Reno), 164, 165 
Wright, Frank Lloyd, 210 


XYZ 

Young, C. Clifton "Cliff," 
344 

Young, Cy C., 36 
Young, Dolores Samuels 
"Dee," 343 
Zetooney, Abe, 258 


Valley of Fire, Nevada, 

332 

Van Camp, E. J., 7-8 
Vargas, George, 195, 198, 
358 

Variance Board, Reno, 118, 
121-124, 126 

Veterans of Foreign Wars, 

333 

Virginia City, Nevada, 75 



