GAMING REGULATION 
IN NEVADA 

The Second Sawyer 
Administration 


As remembered by 
Guy W. Farmer 




UNIVERSITY OF NEVADA 
ORAL HISTORY PROGRAM 





Guy W. Farmer: 

Gaming Regulation in Nevada— 
The First Sawyer Administration 


Interviewee: Guy W. Farmer 
Interviewed: 2001 
Published: 2006 
Interviewer: Dwayne Kling 
UNOHP Catalog #206 


Description 

Guy W. Farmer, a longtime northern Nevada j ournalist, writer, and editor, first came to Carson City in January 1962 
and served as Public Information Officer for the Nevada Gaming Commission and Gaming Control Board from 
August 1963 through 1966. Farmers principal responsibilities were to serve as press spokesman for the gaming 
control agencies and as liaison officer with state and national media. His recollections of the early members of the 
Commission and Control Board are vital memories of Nevada’s once unique gaming control system, which has 
become the regulatory model for many of the states that have legalized casino gambling over the past forty years. 

One of the most talked about incidents during Guy Farmer’s association with the administration of Governor Grant 
Sawyer was the highly publicized 1963 Frank Sinatra-Sam Giancana episode. Giancana, undisputed godfather of the 
Chicago mafia family, was listed in Nevada’s Black Book, officially prohibiting him from entering casino properties. 
Giancana was found to be staying at Sinatra’s secluded Cal-Neva Lodge on the North Shore of Lake Tahoe, and 
Sinatra refused to make Giancana leave his property, which resulted in the revocation of Sinatra’s gaming license. 
Farmer recounts details of the investigation and the obscene phone conversation between Frank Sinatra and Gaming 
Control Board Chairman Edward A. Olsen. The Sinatra case created nationwide media interest, and throughout 
the investigations and hearings, Farmer, as press spokesman, was largely responsible for keeping the rest of the 
nation informed on positive actions the gaming control agencies were taking to reduce the influence of organized 
crime in Nevada casinos. 

With the help of state regulators such as Guy Farmer and others, who enforced gaming regulations without fear or 
favor, legislation was passed that created the Nevada Gaming Commission. 

In 1967 Guy Farmer accepted a position as an American diplomat with the U.S. Information Agency, which operated 
overseas information and cultural programs. Following his retirement in 1995, Farmer moved back to Carson City, 
where he serves as an English/Spanish courtroom interpreter and writes a weekly political column for the Nevada 
Appeal. 



GAMING REGULATION 
IN NEVADA 




GAMING REGULATION 
IN NEVADA 


The Second Sawyer 
Administration 


As remembered by 
Guy W. Farmer 

from oral history interviews by Dwayne Kling 
edited by R. T. King 


UNIVERSITY OF NEVADA 
ORAL HISTORY PROGRAM 




The UNOHP's gaming regulation project was made 
possible in part by gifts from the MGM Mirage, the 
Jack Douglass Memorial Fund for Gaming History, 
and the law firm of Lionel Sawyer & Collins. 


Copyright 2006 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Reno, Nevada 89557-0099 
ohp@unr.nevada.edu 
http://www.unr.edu/oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 2006 
Printed in the United States of America 


Photograph courtesy of 
Nevada Appeal. 


Publication Staff: 

Director: R. T. King 
Assistant Director: Mary Larson 
Production Manager: Kathleen Coles 
Production Assistants: Linda Sommer and 
Kathryn Wright-Ross 


ISBN: 1-56475-390-5 



Preface 


T HIS MEMOIR derives from interviews with 
Guy Farmer by oral historian Dwayne Kling. 
It is one product of the University of Nevada 
Oral History Program's (UNOHP) project on gam¬ 
ing regulation and gaming regulators in Nevada. 

Forty years experience in the gaming industry, 
combined with an impressive record of research and 
writing on the subject, made Dwayne Kling the logi¬ 
cal choice to be our oral historian on this extensive 
project. Mr. Kling earned a bachelor's degree in eco¬ 
nomics and business administration from St. Mary's 
College. After service in the army during the Korean 
War, he took a job with Harolds Club in Reno as a 
change person and dice dealer. From this modest 
beginning, a rewarding career in gaming developed. 
Kling worked his way up through a variety of posi¬ 
tions in several casinos, eventually becoming 
co-owner and general manager of the Silver Spur 
Casino, 1971-1981. After selling that property, he 
went on to several other management positions in 



PREFACE 


Reno gaming, retiring from The Virginian Hotel- 
Casino in 1995 as casino manager. 

Following Kling's retirement, Ken Adams, the 
UNOHP's gaming history coordinator, recruited him 
to work on our gaming history series. Kling received 
training in the theory and practice of oral history 
and joined the UNOHP as an associate oral histo¬ 
rian in 1996, concentrating on gaming industry 
history and related issues. In addition to his work 
for the UNOHP, he is the author of The Rise of the 
Biggest Little City: An Encyclopedic History of Reno 
Gaming, 1931-1981, published by the University of 
Nevada Press. 

Its oral origins notwithstanding, the text of this 
book reads much like that of any written composi¬ 
tion. The verbatim transcripts from which it arises 
have been edited for clarity and readability, and 
interviewers' questions that are not contextually sig¬ 
nificant have been deleted. Reflecting its oral 
origins, two unconventional devices are employed 
to represent important parts of the dynamic of spo¬ 
ken language: [laughter] appears when the chronicler 
laughs in amusement or to express irony; and 
ellipses are used to indicate halting speech ... or a 
dramatic pause. 

As with all its published works, the Oral History 
Program vouches for the authenticity of Gaming 
Regulation in Nevada, but it makes no claim that 
the recollections upon which the memoir is based 
are entirely free of error. This is personal history; 


vi 



PREFACE 


this is the remembered past. Copies of the tape re¬ 
cordings of the interviews that are the source of this 
book are housed in the Oral ffistory Program of the 
University of Nevada, where they can be heard by 
appointment. 

UNOHP 
February 2006 




Introduction 


G UY W. FARMER, a longtime northern 
Nevada journalist, writer, and editor, was 
born in Portland, Oregon in 1935. A 1957 
graduate of the University of Washington 
Journalism School in Seattle, he first came to Carson 
City in January 1962, to serve as capital correspon¬ 
dent for the Associated Press. He remained in that 
position until August 1963, when he resigned to 
accept an appointment as Public Information 
Officer for the Nevada Gaming Commission and 
Gaming Control Board. 

Mr. Farmer's principal responsibilities were to 
serve as press spokesman for the gaming control 
agencies and as liaison officer with state and 
national media. At the time of his appointment, 
the Gaming Control Board had been in existence 
for approximately eight years, and the parent 
Gaming Commission was only four years old. Be¬ 
cause of this, Mr. Farmer worked closely with many 
of the early members of the Commission and 



INTRODUCTION 


Control Board. His recollections of the individual 
regulators are vital memories of Nevada's once 
unique gaming control system, which has become 
the regulatory model for many of the states that 
have legalized casino gambling over the past forty 
years. 

Arguably, one of the most talked about incidents 
during Mr. Farmer's association with the adminis¬ 
tration of Governor Grant Sawyer was the highly 
publicized 1963 Frank Sinatra-Sam Giancana epi¬ 
sode. Giancana, undisputed Godfather of the 
Chicago Mafia family, had recently been entered 
into Nevada's Black Book, officially known as the 
List of Excluded Persons. Anyone listed in the Black 
Book was prohibited from entering casino proper¬ 
ties under threat of gaming license revocation, and 
Giancana was found to be staying at Sinatra's se¬ 
cluded Cal-Neva Lodge on the North Shore of Lake 
Tahoe with his girlfriend, Phyllis McGuire of the 
singing McGuire Sisters, who were appearing at the 
club. 

Sinatra refused to make Giancana leave his prop¬ 
erty, and, in fact, rolled out the red carpet for the 
Godfather, the state charged. When Sinatra learned 
that the Gaming Control Board was investigating 
him for possible violations of state gaming regula¬ 
tions, he asked his secretary to call Gaming Control 
Board Chairman Edward A. Olsen to invite the pow¬ 
erful chairman to have dinner at the Cal-Neva. 


x 



INTRODUCTION 


When Olsen declined his invitation, Sinatra called 
him at his office in Carson City; Olsen directed Guy 
Farmer to listen in on the ensuing conversation, a 
key moment in the history of Nevada gaming con¬ 
trol. In the accompanying transcript, Farmer 
recounts details of the obscene phone conversation 
and summarizes the final results of the Sinatra in¬ 
vestigation. 

The Sinatra gaming license revocation case cre¬ 
ated nationwide media interest, and the Nevada 
gaming control agencies received hundreds of let¬ 
ters from all over the country, most of which lauded 
the state of Nevada for attempting to enforce its 
strict regulations. Throughout the investigations 
and hearings in the Sinatra case, Mr. Farmer acted 
as press spokesman for the state and was largely re¬ 
sponsible for keeping the rest of the nation informed 
as to the positive actions the gaming control agen¬ 
cies were taking to reduce the influence of organized 
crime in Nevada casinos. 

Over the past seventy years that casino gaming 
has been legal in Nevada, many casino owners and 
state regulators in different eras have been influen¬ 
tial in keeping the industry clean in order to 
maximize state tax collections and to avoid federal 
intervention. Casino owners like Bill Fiarrah and 
Raymond I. "Pappy" Smith were noted for keeping 
their operations clean and above board. Some of 
the state regulators who enforced the regulations 


xi 



INTRODUCTION 


without fear or favor included Bob Cahill, Ed Olsen, 
Bob Faiss, Charlie LaFrance, "Butch" Feypoldt, Guy 
Farmer, and others who were told to "hang tough." 

With the help of these men and others like them, 
legislation was passed that created the Nevada 
Gaming Commission, and a temporary rapport was 
established between the Sawyer administration and 
President John F. Kennedy. Unfortunately, that rap¬ 
port vanished when Nevada gaming controllers 
confronted the Kennedys' good friend, Frank 
Sinatra. 

In 1967, Mr. Farmer accepted a position with 
the U.S. Information Agency, which operated over¬ 
seas information and cultural programs before it was 
merged into the State Department in 1999. He spent 
almost thirty years as an American diplomat, living 
and working in countries ranging from Australia to 
Venezuela. Following his retirement in 1995, he and 
his late wife, Consuelo, moved back to Carson City, 
where he serves as an English/Spanish courtroom 
interpreter and writes a weekly political column for 
the Nevada Appeal , the Silver State's oldest daily 
newspaper. 

DWAYNE KLING 
Reno, Nevada 










G UY FARMER: When I went to work for the 
state, my position was with the Gaming 
Commission. In reality, however, I per¬ 
formed as public information officer and press 
spokesman for both the Gaming Commission and 
the Gaming Control Board. 

Right from the beginning, I reported primarily 
to the Gaming Control Board chairman, Edward A. 
Olsen, and, to a lesser degree, to the commission. 
As chairman of the Gaming Control Board, Ed held 
one of the most important positions in state gov¬ 
ernment. Governor Grant Sawyer had run for 
election on a "hang tough" gaming control policy, 
and Ed was the right guy for that job. The other 
members of the board were Ned Turner, who'd been 





GAMING REGULATION 


a clerk of the Nevada Supreme Court, and a former 
Clark County sheriff, Butch Leypoldt. 

During my time, the membership of the com¬ 
mission and the board remained the same. Milton 
Keefer of Las Vegas was chairman of the commis¬ 
sion throughout. He was an attorney in private 
practice in Vegas. Another member was James 
Hotchkiss, who ran an armored car service in Vegas. 
There were two Reno members: F. E. "Pete" Walters, 
a realtor; and Pete Petersen, former Reno postmas¬ 
ter. Norman Brown, a rancher in Smith Valley, was 
also on the commission. 

Milt Keefer was definitely the leader of the com¬ 
mission and a strong chairman. He was kind of a 
tough customer, quite demanding, and he closely 
scrutinized recommendations made by the board. 
On occasion he questioned their decisions, but, for 
the most part, the commission went along with the 
actions the board took—most particularly, in the 
Sinatra license revocation case. 

Milt was backed up very firmly by Jim Hotchkiss. 
They had similar backgrounds: they were both 
former FBI agents, and they didn't like the mob. 
They believed in the Black Book concept and the 
idea of weeding the hoodlums out. We're not just 
talking about people who may have been illegal 
gamblers prior to coming to Nevada—I mean, we 
would have lost everyone! [laughter] But as we used 
to say, and maybe they still do today, "Who do you 
want running a casino, a gambler or an accountant?" 


2 



Guy W. Farmer 


Jim Hotchkiss was a strong member, but the 
Reno members were less memorable to me. Pete 
Walters kept up with things pretty well and knew 
what was going on, and I viewed him as a good 
member of the commission. Pete Peterson, the ex¬ 
postmaster, was probably the political appointee—a 
good fellow, but he didn't exercise any leadership 
that I remember. 

Norman Brown was a pillar of integrity. He was 
the kind of old-line Nevadan that you really like to 
have on the Gaming Commission. There was no way 
to bribe a fellow like this—he just cared very deeply 
about Nevada. I really admired him for his charac¬ 
ter and the kind of person that he was. He was a 
Smith Valley rancher, and sometimes he'd miss a 
meeting because he was driving his cattle from 
Smith Valley to Bridgeport or back, because that was 
his priority at the time. When it came time for the 
cattle drive, that's where you'd find Norman Brown. 
I actually arranged some speaking appearances for 
him, and he was great, talking about the need for 
strong gambling control and for keeping the mob 
out. 

The members of both the board and the com¬ 
mission were appointed by the governor. The 
Gaming Commission was given final authority for 
gaming licenses and all disciplinary actions, and the 
board was the administrative body that did every¬ 
thing else—all of the license investigations, the 
enforcement investigations—and administered the 


3 



GAMING REGULATION 


gaming laws on a daily basis. Basically, the com¬ 
mission met once a month, unless there was some 
kind of emergency. 

The Gaming Control Board members were full¬ 
time employees, whereas the commission was a 
part-time body. What you were looking for in the 
commission were distinguished Nevadans with 
reputations for honesty and integrity, who would 
act in the best interests of the state on their deci¬ 
sions on gaming licenses and enforcement actions. 

It's my understanding that before the board and 
commission were created, gaming control in Nevada 
was named "Robbins Cahill." [laughter] Bob Cahill 
was it! He was the executive secretary of the Tax 
Commission, and the only hammer the state had 
on licensees was really through the Tax Commis¬ 
sion. Bob Cahill did attempt to do some background 
investigation, and he was a towering figure of his 
time, during the 1950s. I think he paved the way 
for the tougher gaming law that came with the elec¬ 
tion of Grant Sawyer. 

Ray Abbaticchio was Governor Sawyer's first 
Gaming Control Board chairman. He was an ex-law- 
enforcement type and a feisty fellow. He really 
stirred things up by conducting raids on the Vegas 
Strip. When the Black Book first went into effect, 
they would actually go into a casino with a number 
of agents and make quite a stir if they spotted an 
alleged hoodlum or Black Book type. Ray got a lot 
of publicity and made the casino people angry. 


4 



Guy W. Farmer 


Governor Sawyer tried for a third term in 1966, 
but Paul Laxalt beat him. (We used to say in those 
days, "Even Jesus couldn't get elected to a third term 
in Nevada.") Laxalt appointed Alan Abner chairman 
of the Gaming Control Board. Abner was an excel¬ 
lent PR guy in Reno, a very loyal Republican, very 
close to Paul Laxalt and the Laxalt family, but it 
was a terrible appointment. 

Alan Abner is a very nice guy: he was completely 
out of his depth as chairman of the Gaming Control 
Board. He was replaced after a few months by Prank 
Johnson, my successor as the public information 
person for the commission and board. Johnson was 
a Reno newspaperman who'd been editor of the 
Nevada State Journal —a good guy, wrote a column, 
and was well respected. He was a much better 
appointment as Gaming Control Board chairman. 

DWAYNE KLING: It's interesting how many chair¬ 
men of the board were journalists or media people 
in the early days. 

There was a very close relationship in those days 
between journalists and politicians. Things were 
different then, in that journalists weren't always 
digging for dirt on politicians, like they do today. 
We tended to be friends. Professionally, we prob¬ 
ably should have kept more of a distance, but here 
we were in a small state .... We all knew each other. 
We needed each other. 


5 



GAMING REGULATION 


The politicians needed the news guys; the news 
guys needed the politicians. It was a slightly inces¬ 
tuous relationship, that, frankly, I preferred to what 
we have these days, in which there's implacable 
hostility and what's come to be called the "politics 
of personal destruction." If I had written a story 
every time I saw a politician falling down drunk, 
that's probably all I would have done. 

Did you ever feel that politics was involved in nam¬ 
ing certain individuals to the board or to the 
commission ? 

A little bit. I thought a couple of the people were 
appointed because they had been loyal, political 
people: specifically, Ned Turner on the board and 
Pete Petersen on the commission. Both were very 
good guys, guys who'd worked for the Democratic 
Party for many, many years. I feel their appoint¬ 
ments were political. 

Of course, gaming control did affect politics in 
Nevada, and it always will. In my day there was a 
mini-ffatch Act, in that Gaming Control Board and 
Gaming Commission employees were not supposed 
to be involved directly in politics, but the line was 
crossed from time to time. I wrote a number of what 
would probably be regarded as political speeches for 
Governor Sawyer. I wrote gambling control speeches 
that said we were highly successful and doing a fine 


6 



Guy W. Farmer 


job, and that was certainly political. I also wrote 
some civil rights speeches. I wrote the introduction 
when Governor Sawyer introduced Martin Luther 
King Jr. in Las Vegas. I wrote some civil rights stuff 
and was a good deal more liberal in those days than 
I am today, but, basically, the Gaming Control Board 
had a little bit of insulation there. 

To his credit, I'm not aware that Sawyer ever used 
a heavy hand with Ed Olsen: "You do this, you do 
that." Ed got some guidance from Sawyer, but I think 
that Ed Olsen had a very good idea of what the 
"hang tough" gaming control policy was all about, 
and he was doing Sawyer's bidding without a lot of 
direct interference from the governor. There wasn't 
as much politics as you might think in gaming con¬ 
trol. 

Occasionally, I'd demur in political things that 
I didn't want to be involved with. I didn't think it 
was a good idea to get involved, and I used to argue 
about it with my friends in the governor's office, 
like Bob Faiss and Chris Schaller. I wasn't a front¬ 
line political operative, anyway, the way they were. 
I was there as a journalist and public information 
guy. If I did my job well, I thought that would re¬ 
flect well on the Sawyer administration. Strong 
gaming control is a political plus in Nevada, I be¬ 
lieve. Nevadans understand the importance of 
keeping a handle on this industry. 


7 



GAMING REGULATION 


Did you ever hear of political pressure being put on 
board or commission members to license individu¬ 
als or casinos? 

Not directly. There could have been a case where 
maybe a commission member's friend would put in 
a good word for somebody, but basically, in those 
years, they were beefing up the investigations, and 
the license application rose or fell on the weight of 
the investigation. It would have been very hard to 
manipulate that. 

I don't recall the governor ever intervening di¬ 
rectly. However, Nevada is a small state. In those 
days, everybody knew everybody; sure, there were 
recommendations being made and comments be¬ 
ing made on license applications. An investigation 
would include conversations with a lot of people 
who knew the applicants pretty well. Some of those 
could have been political types. It's entirely possible 
to that extent. . . but political pressure, arm-twist¬ 
ing and all, I never saw much of that. 

Was there harmony between the commission and 
the board during the years that you were there? 

I recall mostly harmony. I think the commis¬ 
sion had faith in Ed Olsen's and Butch Leypoldt's 
judgment and knew that they were trying to do the 
right thing. Of course, they reviewed what was go¬ 
ing on, especially Keefer and Hotchkiss, and they 


8 



Guy W. Farmer 


stayed in pretty close touch with Butch Leypoldt 
down south. The commission met every month— 
one month they'd meet in Carson, and the next 
down in Vegas—so there was a lot of back and forth 
in those days, flying the old Bonanza Airlines, 
bumping along. 

The board had three divisions: enforcement, 
administration, and investigation. In my day the 
investigation division was headed by Charles 
LaFrance, another former FBI agent. FFe'd been an 
organized crime specialist, and my guess is that 
when J. Edgar Hoover was trying to ignore the exis¬ 
tence of the Mafia or the mob, Charlie LaFrance was 
doing everything he could to expose those guys and 
to bring them to justice. Charlie LaFrance was a 
tough customer. 

Charlie was in charge of the investigators, among 
whom were a couple of other FBI agents. We had 
several former agents involved in investigating the 
license applicants. Now, they weren't gamblers, but 
they had very good ties. (When I first went to work 
for the board, relations were excellent between the 
Gaming Control Board and the FBI. Later on, they 
deteriorated for mostly political reasons.) So Charlie 
was the chief investigator, and he was a driving 
force, along with Ed Olsen, in the Sinatra license 
revocation. 

In those days the enforcement division was 
headed by Tommy Hill. Tommy was a gambler and 
had a staff of gamblers, because who else can detect 


9 



GAMING REGULATION 


cheating? Not FBI agents! That's why you hire ex¬ 
gamblers. 

The other division was the administrative divi¬ 
sion, and from there I remember a files chief named 
Ray Koon. I think Ray later became the head of in¬ 
vestigations. Jack Stratton was our office manager, 
and Jack later served on the board. We didn't have 
much of a staff. I think our total staff in Carson and 
Reno and Vegas may have been fifty people, plus 
alleged undercover agents . . . whom I never saw, 
but they were allegedly out there, [laughter] They 
were hidden so well that I didn't know if they were 
real! Here's a story about the undercover agents: 

The two things Governor Sawyer was most proud 
of were gambling control and progress on civil rights 
in Nevada. There was an old saw that to gamble 
alongside black people was bad luck, and when 
Sawyer took office, blacks were, in effect, still being 
banned from the major casinos. That contributed 
to Nevada's reputation as "the Mississippi of the 
West." 

The industry was quite segregated. If you were a 
minority, you gambled at Bill Fong's New China 
Club in Reno, or you gambled at the Moulin Rouge 
in Vegas, or the little clubs in North Las Vegas. Well, 
Sawyer told Ed, the Gaming Commission, and the 
Board to do away with that. 

Word was that clubs were kicking out the board's 
African-American undercover agents. I can't say that 
we ever really had any, but Ed made a few phone 


10 



Guy W. Farmer 


calls to Butch in Vegas, and African Americans 
started gaining access to the major casinos. 

One of the last holdouts was the El Capitan in 
Hawthorne, owned by Woody Loftin. They had kind 
of a blue-collar clientele, and they weren't real eager 
to integrate the club. Ed made a call to Woody Loftin 
and said, "Woody, you just kicked out one of my 
undercover agents. You know, if this kind of thing 
continues, we'll have to close you down." Well, the 
El Capitan caved in and integrated its games. Ed 
Olsen and his black undercover agents—real or 
imagined—had a lot to do with ending segregation 
in Nevada's casinos. 

In 1960a " List of Excluded Persons" was published. 
(It was commonly referred to as the Black Book.,) 
Could you give me a little background on that — 
who started it, whose idea it was, who enforced it, 
and so on? 

Well, the one who gets credit for the Black Book 
is Grant Sawyer, because it came in after he took 
office and instituted his "hang tough" gaming con¬ 
trol policy. One of his concerns was always that the 
state was too closely associated with the mob, and 
that the mob was running Vegas. All that dates from 
Bugsy Siegel and the Flamingo, and that is well- 
known history. 

Grant Sawyer and his gaming control people 
said, "We don't want the mob to be visible in and 


11 



GAMING REGULATION 


around Nevada casinos, so we're going to create a 
list of excluded persons, and here are the kinds of 
people we're talking about." That first list had, if 
I'm not mistaken, eleven names, and I believe there 
were still only eleven names on it when I joined 
the board and commission staff. They had been put 
into a black binder, and that black binder became 
the Black Book. That was the colorful name for it, 
and the casinos were advised that they were to kick 
these guys out if they showed up. 

During the Ray Abbaticchio era, when a couple 
of these people did visit Vegas, the Gaming Control 
Board squads came running through the casinos and 
harassed them until they threw these people out. 
Well, one of the guys they threw out was, as I under¬ 
stand it, a mid-level hoodlum from Chicago named 
Marshall Caifano, known more popularly as Johnny 
Marshall. He filed a lawsuit in, I believe, December, 
1960. He was thrown out of one or more of the ca¬ 
sinos and harassed, and he claimed that his civil 
rights were violated, because he couldn't freely visit 
Nevada casinos. That was quite a test for Nevada 
law. 

(Of course, Nevada gaming law is ... . If you're 
a cop, you love it, because the burden is on the ac¬ 
cused to prove that they didn't do it. That's because 
it's a privileged industry—a Nevada gaming license 
is not a right; it's a privilege. Today, when there is 
talk of gaming taxes, gaming industry spokesmen 
say, "We want to be treated like everybody else." 


12 



Guy W. Farmer 


The state's answer is, "No, we don't treat you like 
everybody else in Nevada, because you're in a privi¬ 
leged industry. We give you a gaming license, but 
we put some pretty strict conditions on it.") 

Anyway, Johnny Marshall claimed that he had 
a right to run through the casinos any time he 
wanted, so he sued the state of Nevada—specifically, 
the Gaming Commission and the Gaming Control 
Board—for passing onerous regulations that kept 
him out of the casinos. He claimed his civil rights 
were violated and sought $150,000 in civil dam¬ 
ages, which was real money in those days. 

There was a trial in Las Vegas federal court in 
the fall of 1963, and Johnny Marshall testified about 
how he was harassed and put upon by the state of 
Nevada. Ed Olsen and gaming commissioners Keefer 
and Hotchkiss testified for the state that we needed 
this type of regulation in order to keep the mob out 
of here. That trial was held before Federal District 
Judge M. D. Crocker of Fresno. (He was a visiting 
judge—all the Nevada judges knew the players and 
had to recuse themselves.) Judge Crocker eventu¬ 
ally found against Marshall, dismissed his 
complaint, and said he didn't have any right to free 
run of the casinos, and that this was a reasonable 
exercise of the state's police power. That was a very 
important decision in the state of Nevada. 

Marshall appealed and lost, and the federal ap¬ 
peals court issued one of the great decisions in the 
history of Nevada gaming. In validating the Black 


13 



GAMING REGULATION 


Book and Nevada's right to exclude people from ca¬ 
sinos, the appeals court stated, "Plaintiff's entry 
upon the gambling premises would present an emer¬ 
gency comparable to that presented by an animal 
running at large while suspected of being afflicted 
with foot-and-mouth disease." You couldn't say it 
any better than that! We were absolutely delighted, 
and I put out the good word to the national media, 
which had followed the trial. 

Johnny Marshall was most disappointed. I had 
an encounter with him in a men's room in Vegas, 
and Johnny was very unhappy that he couldn't 
come to Vegas whenever he pleased and romp in 
the casinos. But there was a postscript to this— 
Marshall was tried and convicted in Los Angeles on 
extortion charges early in 1964. He got ten years, 
so, to him, the whole Black Book thing became 
moot. 

When I left the board, my colleagues at the 
Gaming Control Board made up a special Black Book 
with me in it. It was the original list of excluded 
persons, with my name added. I was in there with 
John Battaglia, "Johnny Batts." He was from Los 
Angeles. Marshall Caifano, "Johnny Marshall" was 
in the original, and he was out of Chicago. Carl and 
Nick Civella were brothers that were high up in the 
Kansas City mob. Mike Coppola, "Trigger Mike," was 
living in Miami at that time. Louis "Tom" Dragna 
of Los Angeles. Robert "Bobby" Garcia, also from 
Southern California. Sam Giancana, "Mooney," was 


14 



Guy W. Farmer 


the Chicago godfather and a good friend of Frank 
Sinatra. Motel Grzebienacy . . . his first name was 
actually Motel, as it sounds, and his last name was 
Grzebienacy, but since nobody could pronounce his 
last name, including me, he was known as Max 
Jaben. Maxjaben was also from Kansas City Murray 
"The Camel" ffumphreys was out of Chicago. And 
Joe "Wild Cowboy" Sica was from Los Angeles. 
Those were the eleven people that were in the Black 
Book at that time. 

Regarding the Johnny Marshall case, I can't 
emphasize enough how important the federal ap¬ 
peals court decision was to the state in its attempts 
to control the gambling business. Governor Sawyer 
issued a statement after Judge Crocker's decision 
against Johnny Marshall, and Sawyer said, "At the 
outset of Nevada's war against hoodlums and un¬ 
desirables from other areas sojourning in this state, 
I said in regard to Marshall and all of the other Black 
Book figures, they could sue and be damned. Judge 
Crocker's decision vindicates my original feeling, 
which I again re-emphasize by warning all persons 
of Marshall's ilk to stay out of Nevada's gambling 
areas." He was pretty pleased with the decision. 

Sawyer also said, in an overall discussion of how 
important gambling control is to this state and what 
we were attempting to do at that time, "The con¬ 
tinuation of exclusive control by the state is 
necessary, legal, and proper, and will provide a fur¬ 
ther base for the strengthening of the industry and 


15 



GAMING REGULATION 


our general economy." What he's saying there is that 
the state had exclusive control over gambling un¬ 
der this unique law that we had passed here, and 
that federal law, federal rights, did not include any 
right to frequent Nevada casinos. Very, very impor¬ 
tant decision. 

During the John F. Kennedy administration there 
were some veiled threats against Nevada gaming 
operations. Were you involved in any of the situa¬ 
tions where Attorney General Robert Kennedy came 
to the state of Nevada and caused problems? 

When I first went to work for the board in mid- 
1963, the relationship between Nevada and the feds 
was pretty good—the Justice Department and the 
FBI. We used the FBI for our background checks. 
(All that the small, restricted slot licensees needed 
was an FBI background check.) Those relations were 
good. Two former FBI people were on the commis¬ 
sion, and there were a number of them on the 
Gaming Control Board Staff, including Charlie 
LaFrance, a guy named Harold Jacobsen, and a 
couple of others. So that relationship was pretty 
good. 

When John Kennedy was elected president and 
appointed his brother, Bobby, as attorney general, 
things began to change. Also, I think, the Sinatra 
case contributed to that. At that time Frank Sinatra 
was very friendly with the Kennedys. There were 


16 



Guy W. Farmer 


allegations that at one point President Kennedy and 
Sam Giancana, the Chicago godfather, shared the 
same call-girl lady friend, Judith Campbell Exner, 
and we since know that Bobby Kennedy had warned 
Jack Kennedy about these kinds of associations. 

Bobby, with the willing collaboration of J. Edgar 
Hoover, decided to crack down on Nevada gambling. 
It was sure a lot easier to crack down on Nevada 
than on crime in some other state. Nevada was a 
small state, not much population, and "the only 
state with legal gambling," which was not true at 
all. 

One of the things the government did was to 
institute a program of bugging and wire-tapping in 
our state. They bugged and wire-tapped a number 
of gamblers and casino owners, who were legal here 
and were, for the most part, following our laws and 
behaving themselves. (Many of them were former 
illegal gamblers who'd come here and gone legit, if 
you will.) 

There was bugging and wire-tapping, and Sawyer 
was a strong believer in civil rights, and he believed 
that that was an infringement on the rights of le¬ 
gitimate citizens of the state of Nevada. It was also 
a violation of our state constitution. Sawyer got mad 
and made some unflattering statements about 
J. Edgar Hoover and Bobby Kennedy. 

Bobby, by that time, had energized the federal 
Justice Department's strike forces out of Los Angeles 
and brought them over here and raided some horse 


17 



GAMING REGULATION 


and race books in Las Vegas. In at least one case, 
they actually broke a door down, as if it was an ille¬ 
gal race book in Boston. About the same time, NBC 
did a big expose on bookie joints in Boston, which, 
of course, was Kennedy home territory. So, go fig¬ 
ure. But in any case, the hypocrisy of it was getting 
to us, and, particularly, getting to Governor Sawyer. 
He was very, very unhappy. 

I find it ironic that Bobby Kennedy, who ran for 
president as a great social liberal and protector of 
everybody's civil rights, conducted this type of ac¬ 
tivity in Nevada, violating the rights of Nevadans; 
but I guess it's not totally surprising when you re¬ 
member that Bobby Kennedy started out as a staffer 
with the infamous Senator Joe McCarthy. Perhaps 
his approach to law enforcement came from 
McCarthy: you smear everybody first, and then see 
whether you can find some facts to back it up. 

At one point Sawyer went back to Washington 
and met with President Kennedy. Sawyer had been 
a very strong supporter of President Kennedy. It's 
Nevada, so he hadn't delivered millions of votes, 
but he really admired Jack Kennedy and was a 
Kennedy kind of guy. (When Kennedy inaugurated 
twenty-five-mile hikes for fitness, we all had to suit 
up and march twenty-five miles down to the Carson 
Valley.) So, Sawyer went back and asked Jack 
Kennedy to call off Bobby and the strike forces and 
stop all the bugging and wire-tapping. 


18 



Guy W. Farmer 


Sawyer was also angry with J. Edgar Hoover, who 
always came out with per capita crime statistics such 
that our one million residents got credit for every 
petty theft committed by every small-time gambler 
who came through Nevada. Hoover was making us 
look pretty bad. 

It got very heated during the 1966 gubernato¬ 
rial election campaign, and Sawyer ended up calling 
Hoover a Nazi. (I didn't write that speech.) Hoover 
didn't take kindly to that intemperate language, and 
he basically intervened in that election campaign 
on behalf of Paul Laxalt. I won't say he cost Gover¬ 
nor Sawyer a third term, but he certainly didn't help. 
Hoover was a revered figure at that time. This was 
all before everything came out about him prancing 
around in red dresses and things like that. 

During the 1960s, Frank Sinatra was licensed at the 
Cal-Neva Club on the north shore of Lake Tahoe. 
In the summer of 1963 it was determined that Sam 
Giancana, a Chicago mobster on the "List of Ex¬ 
cluded Persons," was a guest of the Cal-Neva. Would 
you give me your remembrances and your recollec¬ 
tions of that incident. 

Well, you have stated it correctly, except 
Giancana wasn't just a Chicago mobster, he was the 
Chicago "godfather," one of the top organized crime 
figures in the United States. As I recall, the FBI had 


19 



GAMING REGULATION 


lost his trail. They usually followed him around 
Chicago, but somehow he made it out to Nevada, 
invited by his friend, Frank Sinatra, who had a life¬ 
long association with organized crime figures. He'd 
been invited to come out to have a rendezvous with 
his girlfriend, Phyllis McGuire, of the singing 
McGuire Sisters. 

Grant Sawyer and Ed Olsen were very unhappy 
about Frank's operations at the Cal-Neva at Crystal 
Bay, North Lake Tahoe. The Cal-Neva at that time 
just operated during the summer season, from 
Memorial Day to Labor Day. Ed had talked to Frank 
at the outset of that summer season about the un¬ 
savory characters that we were seeing up there and 
about running prostitutes or call girls through the 
lobby—a pretty shabby operation—and said that we 
wanted him to clean that up and behave himself. 
Sinatra's basic response to all of this was, "I've got a 
lot of friends, and I treat them right, and that's what 
I'm going to do, and there's nothing you can do 
about it." And sure enough, Sinatra continued the 
same kind of operation up there, which culminated 
in Giancana's visit, and that brought matters to a 
head. 

Ed wanted to talk to Sinatra about the Giancana 
visit. Saturday, August 31, 1963, Sinatra called 
Olsen—he was agitated about publicity that the 
board and commission were going to subpoena him 
and some of his friends to come and tell them what 
was going on up there. I had gone to work for the 


20 



Guy W. Farmer 


board in July or August of 1963, and I happened to 
be in the office that day. When Frank called, Ed told 
me to get on the phone. I was the only other per¬ 
son in the office at that time. 

You would think that the Gaming Control Board 
would have had bugging and wire-tapping equip¬ 
ment, but we didn't. It was before all the 
sophisticated listening devices, so I was the listen¬ 
ing device, and I heard the conversation, which got 
increasingly heated. As Ed said in his classic memo, 
Sinatra was profane in the extreme. He called him 
every name in the book. Sinatra even called Ed, who 
was crippled by polio in his youth, "a crippled SOB." 

It was a very nasty phone call, but that phone 
call was not the reason the board and commission 
moved against Sinatra's license. It was the fact that 
he rolled out the red carpet for Sam Giancana, the 
Chicago godfather, who was in the Black Book. You 
couldn't have had a more clear violation of the rules 
and regulations we had put in place to try to clean 
up the gambling business. 

According to the memo I did at the time, Sinatra 
initially invited Olsen to come up to the Cal-Neva 
and talk about this business "like a couple of friendly 
guys." Olsen suggested that Sinatra come into the 
Gaming Control Board office in Carson City, since 
Olsen largely wanted to be on his own turf. Sinatra, 
of course, refused to come to Carson, so Olsen of¬ 
fered to meet with him at the North Lake Tahoe 
home of the Cal-Neva accountant, Newell Hancock, 


21 



GAMING REGULATION 


who, I think, had been on the Control Board staff 
at one point. 

Sinatra got more and more angry as this went 
along. He accused Olsen of harassing the little guys 
who worked at the club, and he objected to the sub¬ 
poenas. At one point he threatened Olsen, warning 
him that if he continued with this action, he would 
get "a big, fat surprise." And Sinatra had the friends 
who could give Olsen a big, fat surprise. 

Olsen asked Sinatra if he was making threats. 
Sinatra said he wasn't, but it sounded like a threat 
to me. At another point, Sinatra offered to bet Olsen 
$50,000 that the subject of subpoenas had been 
mentioned in newspaper stories. Olsen said he 
didn't have that kind of money, and Sinatra coun¬ 
tered with, "Well, you're not in my class." Frank 
was used to getting his own way and playing by his 
own rules, and we called his bluff. 

Do you think that the mob or the Mafia was actu¬ 
ally involved in the operation of the Cal-Neva, or 
was Mr. Sinatra simply trying to impress or return 
favors to Giancana ? 

Well, Sinatra certainly had enough money to run 
a club, and I don't recall ever seeing any evidence 
that the Mafia, per se, was running his club, but I 
think it's fair to say that they were welcome up there. 
It was a nice retreat. They had the cabins, there was 
some privacy, and it would have been a good place 


22 



Guy W. Farmer 


to meet your girlfriend, gamble a little ... a very 
nice setting. The Cal-Neva has a beautiful location 
up there right on the state line. 

After this phone conversation, Ed gave my wife 
and me twenty bucks out of the enforcement funds, 
and we went up to the Cal-Neva that night with a 
copy of the Black Book in hand. This is how thin 
we were in the enforcement agency. There were my 
wife and I, a couple of twenty-eight, thirty-year-old 
kids, up there looking for hoodlums, [laughter] We 
spent the twenty bucks, and that's probably the most 
gambling that we've ever done in the state of 
Nevada. 

As I recall, Sinatra had a fellow named Skinny 
D'Amato as his right-hand man at the Cal-Neva. 

Skinny D'Amato was the enforcer. He was the 
bodyguard and Sinatra's front guy up there. It's kind 
of incongruous. You think about the setting of North 
Lake Tahoe in those days. There wasn't that much 
going on up there, but here's this high-powered 
Sinatra operation, with people like Skinny D'Amato 
playing a prominent role. That was not like the gen¬ 
eral scene at Lake Tahoe in those days. People like 
Skinny D'Amato and Sam Giancana were out of 
place there. 

When I talk about Sinatra, I always try not to 
just dump on him. I was angry at that time, too. He 
just challenged us right to our faces, challenged our 


23 



GAMING REGULATION 


ability to control gambling in this state. But, of 
course, Sinatra was a great entertainer, a great singer, 
did a lot for the state, got a lot of people in here, 
and helped to popularize Las Vegas. I recognize his 
great talent and what he did for the state, but this 
was the most serious challenge .... I think it's the 
most serious challenge to gambling control in the 
state's history, and we just had to do what we did. 
We had to move on his license. We couldn't allow 
that challenge to go unmet. 

Do you suppose Olsen would have ordered Sinatra 
to get Giancana off of the property, if he hadn't al¬ 
ready left? 

Oh, yes. Oh, absolutely! That would have been 
the Black Book action, just like Johnny Marshall's. 
Sure, Ed would have ordered him out. He might even 
have done an Abbaticchio-type strike force, me and 
my wife and a couple of other guys going up there, 
picking up cards and dice and.... [laughter] But, yes, 
we didn't want Giancana out here. At that time 
Giancana was probably the most notorious mem¬ 
ber of the Black Book. Some of the others were just 
soldiers, but he was the Godfather, and widely rec¬ 
ognized as such. Everybody knew Giancana was big 
trouble! 

What finally happened was that the board filed 
a complaint against Sinatra for hosting Giancana, 
for basically rolling out the red carpet for him, in 


24 



Guy W. Farmer 


violation of state rules and regulations. Sinatra's re¬ 
sponse was to bluster and say he was bigger than 
the state of Nevada; and after all he'd done, why 
were we so ungrateful? 

He drummed up a big P.R. operation, in which I 
received many, many phone calls from nationally 
syndicated columnists. I talked to people like 
Westbrook Pegler and Drew Pearson, who were na¬ 
tional figures: "Why are you harassing our friend 
Frank?" That campaign was led in Nevada by Hank 
Greenspun, editor and publisher of the Las Vegas 
Sun. He was Frank's very good friend, and 
Greenspun, of course was a maverick Republican, 
so he was on the other side of the political spec¬ 
trum from Grant Sawyer, who was a liberal 
Democrat. 

They geared up a P.R. campaign, trumpeting all 
over the place that we were abusing this innocent 
person who had done so much for our state, ignor¬ 
ing, of course, the fact that he just shoved Giancana 
right in our face and violated the whole anti-hood¬ 
lum policy that we were pursuing here. And it was 
a very effective national campaign. It was a black 
eye for Nevada, in that sense, but we did what we 
had to do—continued the complaint against Sinatra. 
He hired as his attorney Harry Claiborne, the Vegas 
attorney who later became a federal judge and then 
was disbarred on corruption charges. 

In the end, Sinatra threw in the towel and went 
away quietly when he realized that he wasn't going 


25 



GAMING REGULATION 


to win. When you are accused of cheating or host¬ 
ing a hoodlum, you have to prove that you didn't 
do it. There was no way that he could have proven 
that Giancana wasn't his guest at the Cal-Neva. He 
was, and Sinatra had been warned about that 
months earlier. 

(You can hear from some later gaming control 
people, the people that let Sinatra back in, that 
Sinatra lost his license just because Ed Olsen got 
into a snit over a nasty phone call. It wasn't the 
phone call. That is a total fabrication! That's the 
neo-history of the thing. I don't want to lay that on 
any particular people, but they rewrote history when 
they let Sinatra back in.) 

At the time, the Cal-Neva had closed for the sea¬ 
son, and it never reopened under Sinatra's 
ownership. The phone call was made August 31 of 
1963. On October 7, attorney Harry Claiborne is¬ 
sued a statement on behalf of Frank Sinatra, "About 
six months ago, I decided my investments and in¬ 
terests were too diversified and that it would be in 
my best interest to devote most, if not all, of my 
time to the entertainment industry. To achieve this 
I instructed my attorney to adopt an orderly plan 
to liquidate my non-entertainment industry invest¬ 
ments and to merge my interests in one major 
company," et cetera, et cetera, ending up, "I intend 
to divest myself completely from any involvement 
with the gaming industry in Nevada." Translation: 
Sinatra caved in. He realized he couldn't win under 


26 



Guy W. Farmer 


our law, as written, and he caved in and threw in 
his license. 

Sinatra was also licensed for a small percentage 
of the Sands in Las Vegas, where he'd had a fistfight 
with Carl Cohen, and he was very big in the Sands. 
That's usually where the Rat Pack appeared when 
they were in Vegas. So he threw in his licenses for 
the Cal-Neva and the Sands, and, after that, could 
only appear there as an entertainer, until he got his 
license back in the early 1980s. 

Several months after Sinatra threw in his license 
and gave up, Ed Olsen was walking through one of 
the casinos on the Las Vegas Strip, and Frank's friend 
and fellow member of the Rat Pack, Sammy Davis 
Jr., came up to him and said, "Are you Ed Olsen?" 

Ed, with some trepidation, said, "Well, yes." 

Sammy said, "Come on over here in the corner. 
I want to talk to you." 

They went to some relatively quiet corner of the 
casino, and Sammy said, "I just wanted to shake 
your hand. Frank has needed that for a long time." 

Somebody finally told him that he couldn't do 
exactly what he wanted to do, when he wanted to 
do it. Nobody had ever done that to Frank before, 
and it was probably a good lesson for him. 

When I look back at it, the Sinatra case was Vegas 
culture moving into northern Nevada. These were 
fast operators moving into the Cal-Neva, a peace¬ 
ful, tranquil place up at the lake. There were, and 


27 



GAMING REGULATION 


are, two different cultures in Nevada. Northern 
Nevada is sort of blue collar friendly—we had 
women dealers here first—while Vegas is slick and 
new, with adult resorts. 

Sinatra came back into gaming in the early 
1980s. By then, Ronald Reagan and Paul Laxalt were 
in their political ascendancy, and Frank Sinatra was 
now a rabid Republican. He received a lot of recom¬ 
mendations that he was really a fine fellow and that 
the 1963 case had all been a misunderstanding in¬ 
volving this hot head, Ed Olsen, who was angry 
about a nasty phone call. 

The Gaming Control Board, to its credit, actu¬ 
ally sent an investigator to interview me in Madrid, 
Spain, where I was stationed at the American 
Embassy in the Foreign Service. This investigator 
was quite a character. His name was Sully 
DeFontaine. Sully came to Madrid and interviewed 
me about what I recalled about the Sinatra case. Of 
course, I had made copies of a lot of the file stuff 
and told Sully everything I knew, and that I didn't 
think Sinatra should ever be licensed again in the 
state of Nevada, because of the defiant attitude and 
the major challenge he had mounted to our state's 
ability to control the gambling business. I also wrote 
to my friend, Jack Stratton, the former office man¬ 
ager, who was by then a member of the Gaming 
Control Board, strongly opposing the re-issuance of 
a Nevada gambling license to Sinatra. 


28 



Guy W. Farmer 


Well.... Sinatra got his license back and was 
pronounced an upstanding citizen and a great credit 
to the state of Nevada. When you come in recom¬ 
mended by Ronald Reagan and Paul Laxalt, that 
probably helps. After what he did to the state, and 
the challenge that he mounted, I would have never 
licensed him again. I think that was a mistake. I 
think they caved in to political pressure. 

Did the Gaming Control Board receive many let¬ 
ters from customers saying they'd been cheated or 
treated unfairly in the casinos? 

There were very few complaints of that type. We 
conducted routine card-and-dice pickups, in which 
we all participated. We'd go around to casinos, pick 
up the cards and dice, and make sure they were le¬ 
gitimate. We would go into a casino—two or three 
of us from the Gaming Control Board—show our 
I.D., and pick up the cards or dice that were in play. 
We'd take them back to what we euphemistically 
called—I think this was Bob Faiss's invention—the 
"Gaming Control Board Laboratory" in Carson City. 
We did have some equipment to look at the cards 
and to put the dice on micrometers and that sort of 
thing, see if they'd been shaved or loaded. 

When you took this equipment off the table, did 
you seal it? 


29 



GAMING REGULATION 


We sealed it in a bag. We signed it, and the pit 
boss, or whoever was on duty there, signed it, and 
we took it back to Carson City and checked it out. 

During the time I was there, all the cheating we 
discovered, except for the well-known case at the 
Silver Slipper on the Vegas Strip, took place at the 
small clubs. There was a case at Topaz Lake. There 
was a case in Wells, in a place with a single black¬ 
jack table—you hit them for a hundred bucks, 
somebody would get worried. The small clubs were 
more likely to try to stop you when you were hav¬ 
ing success, and that's where I think the cheating 
was going on. The odds are in favor of the big clubs. 
They get the play, they have the percentages going 
for them, and they make the money. The Nevada 
thing is that when you come out here to play, they're 
going to deal to you from a fifty-two-card deck, 
they're going to pay you if you win, and there's just 
not the need to cheat you. 

The one big cheating case during my time was 
the Silver Slipper on the Las Vegas Strip. The Silver 
Slipper was a medium-size slot emporium on the 
Strip with a few table games. During a routine card- 
and-dice pickup in April of 1964—and I'm sure that 
was supervised by Butch Leypoldt out of the Vegas 
office—they checked out the dice and found that 
they had been shaved on one side. Of course, that 
affects the odds of which numbers are going to come 

up- 


30 



Guy W. Farmer 


We notified the Silver Slipper owners, who im¬ 
mediately blamed the dealer, but the Gaming 
Control Board closed the entire casino until the case 
could be heard. Well, it was heard on an urgent ba¬ 
sis, obviously. We had closed up the place and put a 
number of people out of work temporarily, but we 
took care of the whole thing within one month. 
The control board recommended closing the casino, 
because this was intentional cheating, and the com¬ 
mission compromised in this instance and closed 
the table games, but permitted them to reopen their 
slots. Meanwhile, the owners decided to sell out, 
and the club opened under new ownership the fol¬ 
lowing year. 

In the case of the Slipper, the casino was prob¬ 
ably fixing the dice to cheat the customers, but it 
may have been that the owners just didn't know 
much about gambling, and their own people were 
ripping them off . . . which happens. At the time, 
most of the cheating in casinos was dealers cheat¬ 
ing the house, an inside job: You're the dealer; I'm 
your buddy. I come in, gamble at your table, and I 
lose. You pay me double. We go out in the alley and 
split the proceeds, and that's that. 

The Slipper was a notorious case. In all such 
cases, the political opposition here in Nevada, when 
we would take an enforcement action, would ques¬ 
tion it and say, "Oh, that's a bad mistake. Governor 
Sawyer and his gaming board and commission are 
making us look bad by taking these public actions." 


31 



GAMING REGULATION 


Well, we would always say, "Let the chips fall 
where they may. We have a mandate here to en¬ 
force the gambling rules and regulations for the 
benefit and the best interests of the people of the 
state of Nevada. Casinos hire expensive P.R. guys to 
make themselves look good. It's not our job to make 
them look good; it's our job to enforce the law, and 
in the end, that's the best thing for the state." 

Some of the Laxalt people never really under¬ 
stood that very well. I go back to Governor Laxalt's 
appointment of Alan Abner, the P.R. guy, to head 
the Gaming Control Board, with instructions to 
"Make the industry look good." Well, you can make 
the industry look good by not taking any enforce¬ 
ment actions, ffey, they look real good, but you're 
not doing your job! I think Paul eventually under¬ 
stood gaming control, but I don't think he did when 
he came in with the idea of polishing the image of 
the industry. 

Let's talk about Ed Thorp. 

Professor Edward Thorp, a mathematics profes¬ 
sor from New Mexico State University, developed 
the "infallible system for winning at blackjack." The 
infallible system, of course, was card counting. He 
was a rather well regarded young mathematician, 
who developed his infallible system and wrote about 
it in a book called Beat the Dealer. He sold 60,000 


32 



Guy W. Farmer 


copies of that book, and a lot of people rushed out 
to Vegas and Nevada to beat the dealer. 

Thorp could beat the house if they played by 
his rules. If they would deal him one deck, and he 
could play head to head with the dealer, then he 
could count the cards and win. Of course, casinos, 
for some reason, like to maintain a margin in their 
favor, [laughter] They responded to Thorp by chang¬ 
ing the rules. They started to deal out of two and 
three-deck shoes, and they started to shuffle after 
every hand, and things like that to make it impos¬ 
sible for Thorp and his followers to count the cards. 

Thorp immediately said that he was being 
cheated. He could feel it in his fingertips—he knew 
when he was being cheated. Now, this is a college 
mathematics professor, and, of course, he was mak¬ 
ing the state look real bad. His book first surfaced, 
to the best of my knowledge, in 1961, and articles 
started to come out about 1964, after his book had 
been selling pretty well. There's a Life article in 
March 1964 in which Thorp calculates he could 
average $300,000 a year, which was real money in 
those days, if the casinos didn't cheat him. 

The writer for Life , Paul O'Neill, had given a lec¬ 
ture to my journalism class at the University of 
Washington when I was a student there. O'Neill 
swallowed this Thorp thing hook, line, and sinker, 
and repeated the cheating allegations without ask¬ 
ing us for any comment. I wrote O'Neill an angry 


33 



GAMING REGULATION 


letter, saying, "You've violated every journalistic rule 
you talked about when you addressed my class at 
the University of Washington." 

This is one of the things O'Neill wrote: "Thorp 
usually knows in his nerve endings just when he's 
being double-crossed." Well, all of this is pretty dra¬ 
matic. This is in Life magazine and repeated in Sports 
Illustrated. Did they ask their Carson City stringer, 
the very capable journalist, Guy Shipler, for any 
comment, or get any comment from the state? No! 
This was just Thorp, throwing out these allegations 
and claiming that if they don't cheat him, he wins! 

Vegas casinos changed their rules for blackjack, 
and everybody said, "Well, there, that shows you— 
it's an infallible system." But, of course, the house 
can change the rules. I mean, that's perfectly legiti¬ 
mate, as long as you play under any generally 
accepted rules of the game. It's a very competitive 
business. If somebody out there is dealing a single 
deck, then the real players look for that kind of an 
advantage. 

Thorp hired a "card detective" to observe his 
games and see whether he was being cheated by 
the casinos. The detective said they had played in a 
hundred games, and there were two instances of 
possible cheating. The Gaming Control Board in¬ 
terviewed Thorp and his alleged card detective in 
January of 1962, when Ed Olsen was still the board 
chairman, and they just couldn't produce any solid 


34 



Guy W. Farmer 


evidence of cheating. What they did was say, "Well, 
they were changing the rules on him, so that his 
system didn't work." So be it. Different casinos have 
different rules. If you can find better rules elsewhere, 
go there and gamble. It's like single-zero roulette 
wheels. If you're a roulette player, you look for a 
single-zero wheel. 

Eventually, a couple of casinos challenged Thorp 
to come in and play. Well, Thorp wouldn't do it, 
because he'd have to play by the casino rules, and 
he said, "I don't like this because of the complexi¬ 
ties." The complexities would be that he would have 
to play by the casino's rules, not his. Out here in 
Nevada, our casinos set the rules, within legal limits. 

The famous gambling expert, John Scarne, chal¬ 
lenged Thorp to a $100,000 blackjack showdown, 
which he rejected, as well. Meanwhile, Readers 
Digest had picked up on the Sports Illustrated story 
under the headline, "Bye-Bye Blackjack." So Thorp 
really got a lot of publicity and sold a lot of books. 
He even went on the Steve Allen Show , the old 
Tonight Show, and repeated his charges. Sawyer got 
steamed about this and said, "How do we counter 
Thorp?" And Sawyer also went on the Steve Allen 
Show. I went down with him to L.A., and I set it up. 

Sawyer tried to counter Thorp, but, of course, in 
those days, the deck was stacked against Nevada, 
"the only state with legal gambling," even though 
six or seven other states were making more money 


35 



GAMING REGULATION 


off legal gambling than Nevada was, including New 
York and California—dog tracks, horse tracks, bingo 
games, card rooms in California—you name it. But 
we were "the only state with legal gambling." 

An air force physicist named ff.T. Bean devel¬ 
oped what he called a "hand-held computer." This 
was 1964, so it probably wasn't a computer as we 
know it, but you could sneak it into a casino, and it 
would help you count the cards under Thorp's sys¬ 
tem. By late 1964, a lot of people had tried Thorp's 
system, playing by Nevada rules, and not many of 
them were winning, even those with a computer. 
Interest faded in Dr. Thorp and his system. 

Instead of "Bye-Bye Blackjack," the end result 
of all of Ed Thorp's publicity was that he greatly 
increased interest in the game of blackjack in 
Nevada, and table-game revenues went up. We had 
more blackjack tables than ever and more black¬ 
jack play than ever. Actually, many of the casinos 
went back to the old pre-Thorp rules, including a 
few single-deck games. 

Ed Thorp just faded away. There was never a law¬ 
suit filed. He didn't take any challenges, and he 
turned out to be a pretty naive mathematics profes¬ 
sor. Mathematicians always want to find the perfect 
system, when it comes to gambling, because you 
can do a lot of mathematics on gambling games. 
Sometimes you win, and sometimes you lose, but 
in the end, the casino has the odds. If they didn't, 
why would they be in business? 


36 



Guy W. Farmer 


In 1965 a person named Ruby Kolod was removed 
from the license of the Desert Inn. He became furi¬ 
ous with Governor Grant Sawyer, blaming Sawyer 
for the action. Would you tell us about Mr. Kolod? 

Ruby Kolod and Moe Dalitz were part of the gang 
that came in and bought the Desert Inn. They were 
illegal gamblers from Cleveland. They ran casinos 
in Cleveland, and I guess they got tired of being 
harassed, so they came out here and decided to go 
legit and buy a gambling casino. Now, does that 
make them mobsters? It would depend. If illegal 
gamblers are by definition mobsters, why, yes, that's 
what they were. 

Vegas was full of them, you know. More than 
the real Giancana-type mob figures, Vegas had 
plenty of operators who had been illegal gamblers 
in other states. They were grandfathered in, and as 
long as they followed the new rules, kept out the 
Black Book guys, ran honest games, we left them 
alone. 

Reno had the same situation. Probably the best 
known of those guys in Reno was Lincoln Fitzgerald, 
but, of course, the Smiths (the family that had 
ffarolds Club) had done some illegal gambling in 
their day, and Bill Harrah's dad had, too. Casino 
gambling was illegal in most other places, so in the 
1960s we had lots of former illegal gamblers in 
Nevada, but they were operating honest games here. 


37 



GAMING REGULATION 


We were happy that gamblers were operating 
casinos. In fact, later on, when Howard Hughes and 
his MBA guys came in here and ran gambling casi¬ 
nos, there were problems—he had a lot of naive 
people supervising gaming operations. So we don't 
hate illegal gamblers. We said, "Keep your nose 
clean, stay away from the mob, follow the rules, 
and we'll leave you alone. Pay your taxes. That's 
fine." 

Ruby Kolod was a 14 percent owner of the DI 
(Desert Inn), and the Gaming Control Board filed a 
complaint to revoke his license as one of the own¬ 
ers on the basis of a conviction in the Colorado 
federal court for conspiracy, extortion, and threats. 
The Gaming Control Board said this made him un¬ 
suitable as a licensee, and the commission ruled 
against Kolod in September 1965. (Kolod had been 
an illegal gambler elsewhere. We don't want to make 
these guys seem too benign. He had an arrest record 
going back thirty years.) So the Gaming Commis¬ 
sion ruled against him, revoked his license. 

Ruby Kolod became very angry with Grant 
Sawyer. And Sawyer, as he always did, said, "The 
Gaming Commission, Gaming Board, are doing ex¬ 
actly as I want. That is what the 'hang tough' gaming 
control policy is all about. You cannot have this kind 
of a conviction, criminal record, and continue to 
be a casino owner here in Nevada." 

Well, Kolod had also done some good things. 
He had founded the Danny Kolod Youth Founda- 


38 



Guy W. Farmer 


tion, which helped sick children. Like Sinatra, a lot 
of these people had a benevolent side. They real¬ 
ized that it's good P.R. to contribute to things like 
that. The Republicans and Paul Laxalt picked up on 
the fact that Ruby Kolod had a heart of gold, and 
they said he was really a good guy and was just mis¬ 
understood. They completely ignored his conviction 
for conspiracy, extortion, and threats, and they criti¬ 
cized Sawyer and the gaming authorities for 
revoking his license. 

I recall Paul Laxalt stopping me on the sidewalk 
here in Carson during that period and asking me 
what we thought we were doing to Ruby Kolod. I 
said, "Well, I think we're revoking his license, be¬ 
cause he has this conviction." 

He said something like, "Well, don't you see? 
This makes us look bad." 

"No, it doesn't. It makes us look good. We're 
doing the right thing here, and that's what the 
Gaming Control Board is supposed to do." 

I really like Paul Laxalt. I liked him then, and I 
like him now. But for a while there, he was mis¬ 
guided on gaming control. 

Did you ever hear that Ruby Kolod pledged $200,000 
to Paul Laxalt's campaign for governor against 
Sawyer in 1966? 

No, I never heard that, but it wouldn't surprise 
me. Paul was very interested in the case, and he had 


39 



GAMING REGULATION 


a private law practice at that time (even while he 
was lieutenant-governor), and he did represent some 
casino people. So I would not be surprised. At the 
outset of it, Kolod was a legal casino owner in 
Nevada and could contribute to the candidate of 
his choice. 

Kolod was a minor issue in the campaign for 
governor in 1966. His case was overshadowed by 
our issues with J. Edgar Hoover, Bobby Kennedy, and 
the Kennedy administration at that time. Sawyer 
had been a good governor, but I think the intem¬ 
perate language that we used against Hoover and 
Bobby Kennedy probably hurt us. Whether it did 
or not, in those days it would have been difficult to 
elect Jesus to a third term in Nevada. People thought 
two terms was enough, and it was time for a change, 
and Paul Laxalt was a very attractive candidate. 

Laxalt was a local hero in Carson City, a very 
smart and articulate person, and he was a formi¬ 
dable opponent. In Carson City's 1966 Nevada Day 
Parade, to counter Laxalt's local popularity, Bob Faiss 
and Chris Schaller and I started at the beginning of 
the parade and ran from corner to corner, ahead of 
Sawyer's float. When he came by, we'd cheer and 
yell and carry on. That's the way politics was in this 
state in those days. It was small-towny politics. 
Sawyer didn't have a huge staff, so he mobilized 
what he had, and out we went. . . although I wasn't 
supposed to be involved in partisan politics as an 
employee of the Gaming Control Board, [laughter] 


40 



Guy W. Farmer 


Paul Laxalt's brother Bob, Robert Laxalt, was just 
the greatest Nevada author! I really liked him. I think 
he was probably a closet liberal, but I admired Bob's 
writing a lot. He was an elegant writer. When he 
died recently I wrote a column saying, "When I read 
Bob Laxalt's writing, I know I'm not a writer; I'm 
just a journalist." 

One of Bob Laxalt's books in his Basque Trilogy, 
The Governor's Mansion, is a revisionist history of 
the 1960s in which the Paul Laxalt character is the 
"white hat," and the Sawyer character is the "black 
hat." It was never that simple. I love Bob Laxalt 
when he's writing about Nevada and the sagebrush, 
and how rural Nevadans are like the sagebrush and 
thrive in unlikely places, and it's just beautiful. 
When he wrote about 1960s politics, he took some 
poetic license. Of course, I think Sawyer was the 
"good guy" and Laxalt was the "bad guy" until he 
understood what gaming control was all about; and 
then, he, too, was a good guy. I've always liked him 
personally, and I liked him politically after he came 
around some on gambling control. 

When Paul Laxalt took office as governor, he was 
very upset about the way we had dealt with J. Edgar 
Hoover and Bobby Kennedy and the Justice Depart¬ 
ment. He thought the mob controlled gaming in 
Nevada, and he saw Howard Hughes as a savior. Who 
would you rather have, Howard Hughes or the 
Mafia? Well, Paul would rather have Howard 
Hughes. Therefore, Hughes didn't even have to ap- 


41 



GAMING REGULATION 


pear before the Gaming Commission to be licensed. 
They issued his gaming license in the middle of the 
night. 

Of course, Howard Hughes brought in model 
managers, the MBAs. Every department in a Hughes 
casino had to break even or show a profit, and that 
was the end of all those good freebies like compli¬ 
mentary food, drinks, and rooms. That ended the 
five-dollar dinner show at Harrah's South Shore 
Room, and it was the start of a new era for Nevada. 
I think it changed the nature of the business and 
the way people approached it. Everything became 
bottom lines. It used to be that the show bars and 
the golf courses in Vegas were loss leaders to get 
people into their casino, but now everybody had to 
be in the black. 

I understand MBA studies and the necessity for 
everybody to make money, but I'm not sure that 
was a good thing for gambling in Nevada. Some of 
the old gamblers, the Ruby Kolods and Moe Dalitzes, 
the Lincoln Fitzgeralds, and even Bill Harrah and 
the Smiths probably had some trouble coming to 
grips with that, but eventually they all hired man¬ 
agement people, and the Hughes management 
techniques came into widespread use. I'm not sure 
that's all to the good. 

What about the skimming rumors that circulated 
prior to the 1966 election? 


42 



Guy W. Farmer 


Skimming rumors plagued us when I worked for 
the Gaming Control Board and Gaming Commis¬ 
sion, and it was always hard to refute them with 
hard evidence. We had an audit division at the 
board, and we had people in the counting rooms 
(in fact, they had to follow the money from the table 
drop box into the counting room), but it would be 
hard to make a categorical statement that no skim¬ 
ming was taking place. 

There were a lot of people, not just State Gaming 
Control Board auditors, that had an interest in try¬ 
ing to stop skimming to ensure that the state 
collected its fair share of the proceeds. Of course, 
casino owners also had a big interest in trying to 
stop skimming by their employees. I never saw any 
solid evidence that casino owners were skimming 
money themselves, but that allegation was a con¬ 
stant with us too. 

When we got into it with Hoover and the FBI 
and Bobby Kennedy, then the allegations really 
started to come out. A lot of those came through a 
journalist named Sandy Smith of the Chicago Sun 
Times. He was being fed information directly by the 
FBI after Hoover got mad at us. After we called him 
a Nazi, here came the allegations about skimming 
and the accusations here in Nevada that Governor 
Sawyer and Ed Olsen knew all about the skimming 
and didn't do anything about it. 

The FBI sent agents into casinos to watch the 
money going down into the drop boxes. Well, what 


43 



GAMING REGULATION 


does that tell you? Nothing. Or they would say, "Ah, 
this casino had a big win streak," or a big streak of 
losses. Well, hey, gambling is like that! But these 
were naive law-enforcement guys. It goes back to 
what I said earlier: you don't want FBI agents or 
policemen as your enforcement people in gambling 
control. Your enforcement people should be gam¬ 
blers. They're people that know the games, people 
that recognize when somebody is dealing a second, 
or when somebody's peeking at her top card, or is a 
"capable" dealer. That's what gaming enforcement 
is about. 

There were all these allegations, and NBC did 
one of their famous "White Papers" on the alleged 
skimming in Nevada, so the governor ordered 
Gaming Commission hearings, presided over by 
Milt Keefer. I was there. What can you say about 
them? You bring in people that say that skimming 
is taking place, and those that adamantly deny it, 
and the Gaming Control Board had very little spe¬ 
cific evidence of skimming. We never could really 
make the ultimate denial, "No, there's no skimming 
taking place." So there probably was some. I hope it 
was not of the proportions that some alleged, but 
we'll never have any way of knowing. As I recall, 
the governor finally told Keefer to put an end to 
the hearings. 

I don't know how you definitively prove that 
skimming exists or doesn't exist. If it does, to what 
extent? How much of it is the casino ripping off 


44 



Guy W. Farmer 


the state tax collectors, and how much of it is the 
inside guys or the counters ripping off the casino 
owners? I don't think we're ever going to know the 
answers. And if skimming does occur, how do you 
stop it? I understand that in recent years they've 
put in more controls. Now we have computerized 
counting and more stringent requirements for how 
the money goes in, how it's counted, how many 
people are in the count room, and increased sur¬ 
veillance. We did put people in the counting rooms 
in those days, but we had a small audit staff, so ca¬ 
sinos didn't get audited very often. 

Do you remember a fellow named Joe Matthews? 
In 1966 he started a petition to substantially raise 
gaming taxes and got it put on the state ballot as an 
initiative. 

Matthews was an early-day Joe Neal. His pro¬ 
posal was a dramatic increase in the gaming tax, 
which, of course, is a tax on the gross—when you 
talk about 6 percent on gross, you're talking about 
a much higher tax than a tax on net. There was also 
a candidate in Sparks, Bill Gault, who eventually 
ran for U.S. Senate, and Bill Gault also was a "soak- 
the-gamblers" kind of guy. 

It seems in every era in Nevada we have a "soak- 
the-gamblers" person. My view isn't so much soak 
the gamblers as it is to charge them a little extra, 
because it's a privileged industry, and they should 


45 



GAMING REGULATION 


be paying their fair share. That is why I now advo¬ 
cate that they add a half or quarter percent on the 
top rate. They could endorse the idea and surround 
themselves with school children and proclaim 
themselves champions of the public—a Bill Clinton 
type of thing. It would be good P.R. 

In 1966, allegations were coming out that gam¬ 
blers weren't paying their fair share, and Matthews 
probably wanted to double the gambling tax. No¬ 
body in their right mind opposes some reasonable, 
rational gambling tax increase based on the facts, 
on a study of the profitability of the industry, but 
we felt that doubling it was pie in the sky, and it 
would really hurt the business. 

The state brought in a reputable, national ac¬ 
counting firm, and they conducted a study that 
concluded that, sure enough, Matthews's proposal 
would have a devastating effect on the gambling 
industry and on state tax collections. I was involved 
in publicizing that study and answering questions 
about it. This made Reverend Matthews and his fol¬ 
lowers very angry He said we were in the pocket of 
the casinos. 

Gaming taxes gradually increased over the years, 
but there hasn't been a bump in the last ten or twelve 
years. That's why I say now, given the budget short¬ 
fall, the casinos would make themselves very good 
citizens by offering up even a quarter percent on 
that top rate. It would make a big difference, but 
they're not going to do it. I don't want to say they 


46 



Guy W. Farmer 


own the legislature, but there isn't going to be a 
serious discussion of gambling taxes, not at the 
moment. 

In your years as a spokesman for the Gaming Con¬ 
trol Board and the Gaming Commission, did you 
have many dealings with the state legislature? 

No. I was mainly in the background. I produced 
public statements. I spoke for the board and com¬ 
mission on gambling control issues, but, basically, 
Ed Olsen and Milt Keefer would testify on gaming 
issues before the legislature ... or sometimes people 
out of the governor's office, like Dick Ham or Bob 
Faiss. I was the public spokesman and liaison with 
the media, but not too much with the legislature. 

I did know a lot of the members of the state leg¬ 
islature in those years, because I had covered them 
as an AP correspondent. In those days, after the leg¬ 
islature would meet, they would adjourn down the 
street to Melody Lane or The Embers, the old legis¬ 
lative bars, and order a couple of bottles of Wild 
Turkey. Then we got our news briefings! 

All the journalists stuck together. There were 
journalists, and there were the state P.R. guys— 
flacks, as they were called. If you're a journalist, 
you're doing the news, and you are a legitimate and 
honorable person. When you cross the street to the 
other side, and you become a spokesman for state 
government or a company or a casino, you become 


47 



GAMING REGULATION 


a flack. You're looked down upon by the journal¬ 
ists, because you sold out. 

In those days, it was a thing among journalists. 
You didn't sell out and become a flack. Of course, I 
became a flack, but not just because I made a little 
more money; and when I say "a little" I mean a 
little. I really believed in what Governor Sawyer and 
Ed Olsen were doing. I admired and respected them, 
and I didn't mind at all being a part of that move¬ 
ment to strengthen gambling control. But I was a 
flack. 

When did you leave your position with the Gaming 
Control Board? 

I left at the end of 1966, but I had decided to 
leave during the election campaign. I had been there 
a little over three years, and I wanted to move on. I 
was interested either in returning to journalism or 
taking a shot at the Foreign Service. My wife was 
from Mexico, and we were young and wanted to go 
out and see a little bit of the world, and we did. I 
was accepted by the U. S. Information Agency and 
had a twenty-eight year career before retiring with 
my wife to Carson City. Northern Nevada has a lot 
of natural attractions to recommend it, and this is a 
real place. As the Carson Valley Inn billboard says, 
"Match this, Las Vegas!" We have the Sierra Nevada, 
and parts of the desert are very beautiful and his¬ 
toric. 


48 



Guy W. Farmer 


What we don't have is the political power we 
once did, and I worry about the growth of the south 
at the expense of the north. What can we do about 
that? Not much. My guess is the gaming control¬ 
lers these days are spending a lot more time down 
south than we did. The bulk of the staff is probably 
down there. For my part, I'll stay right here in Carson 
City. Even Reno is a little too big for me. 

I continue my personal interest in gambling con¬ 
trol in this state, because I've been watching it for a 
long time, and I have strong views about it. In my 
Sunday political column in the Nevada Appeal , I 
occasionally rant and rave about Indian and Internet 
gambling. I think those are two unsuitable forms of 
gambling in the Nevada context, under our law and 
our rules and regulations. They cannot possibly be 
regulated to the standards we require of our 
licensees. 

It's not like the old days, when an operator had 
to choose between being a gambling licensee in 
Nevada or being licensed somewhere else. But I 
think those kinds of restrictions should apply to 
Nevada licensees today, in terms of Indian and 
Internet gaming. They should be forced to choose: 
either stay in Nevada—own your casino here and 
follow our rules—or go get involved in Indian and 
Internet gaming, which are basically unregulated 
and cannot ever be regulated to the standards we 
require of our licensees. 


49 



GAMING REGULATION 


I know my attitude is probably generational. As 
the new Internet people say, "Leave it alone. It's out 
there; it exists; and you can't do a thing about it." 

There are so many Nevada corporations that are in 
other gaming arenas now that it would be difficult 
to ask them to make a choice. 

That's true. First, they fought Indian gaming, and 
then they said, "Well, if we can't beat them, let's 
join them." But I worry sometimes about the lack 
of controls out there. The National Indian Gaming 
Commission has thirty to fifty employees to police 
800 casinos. Figure it out. 

A lot of people who cannot be licensed in Nevada 
are involved in Indian and Internet gambling. 
Internet gaming is the worst. You have 800 Internet 
gambling web sites in Antigua. Can Antigua guar¬ 
antee that they're dealing you an electronic fifty-two 
card deck? I don't think so. Or if you win, will you 
be paid? In Internet gaming, you deserve what you 
get. If you're dumb enough to do it, good luck! 


50 



Index 


A 

Abbaticchio, Ray, 4, 12, 
24 

Abner, Alan, 5, 32 
Antigua, 50 


B 

Battaglia, John "Johnny 
Batts," 14 
Bean, H. T., 36 
Beat the Dealer, 32 
Black Book, 2, 4, 11-15, 
21, 23-24, 37 
Brown, Norman D., 2-3 


C 

Cahill, Robbins E., 4 


Caifano, Marshall 
"Johnny Marshall," 
12-15, 24 

Cal-Neva (Crystal Bay, 
North Lake Tahoe), 
20-21, 23, 26-27 
Chicago Sun Times, 43 
Civella, Carl James, 14 
Civella, Nicholas, 14 
Claiborne, Harry, 25-26 
Cohen, Carl, 27 
Coppola, Michael 
"Trigger Mike," 14 
Crocker, M. D., 13, 15 


D 

Dalitz, Morris B. "Moe," 
37 

D'Amato, Paul "Skinny," 
23 



INDEX 


Danny Kolod Youth 
Foundation, 38 
Davis, Sammy Jr., 27 
DeFontaine, Sully, 28 
Desert Inn (Las Vegas, 
Nevada), 37-38 
Dragna, Louis "Tom," 14 


E 

El Capitan (Hawthorne, 
Nevada), 11 

Exner, Judith Campbell, 
17 


F 

Faiss, Robert, 7, 29, 40 
Fitzgerald, Lincoln, 37 


G 

Garcia, Robert "Bobby," 
14 

Gault, Bill, 45 
Giancana, Salvatore 
"Sam" "Momo" 
"Moonie," 14-15, 17, 
19-21, 23-26 


Governor's Mansion, 41 
Greenspun, Herman 
"Hank," 25 

Grzebienacy, Motel "Max 
Jaben," 15 


H 

Hancock, Newell, 21 
Hill, Tommy, 9 
Hoover, John Edgar, 9, 
17, 19, 40-41, 43 
Hotchkiss, James, 2-3, 8, 
13 

Hughes, Howard, 38, 41- 
42 

Humphreys, Murray 
"The Camel," 15 


J 

Jacobsen, Harold, 16 
Johnson, Frank, 5 


K 

Keefer, Milton W., 2, 8, 
13, 44, 47 

Kennedy, John F., 16-18 


52 



INDEX 


Kennedy, Robert R, 16- 
18, 40-41, 43 
King, Martin Luther Jr., 7 
Kolod, Ruby, 37-40 
Koon, Ray, 10 


L 

LaFrance, Charles, 9, 16 
Las Vegas Sun, 25 
Laxalt, Paul D., 5, 19, 28- 
29, 32, 39-41 
Laxalt, Robert, 41 
Leypoldt, W. E. "Butch," 
2, 8-9, 11, 30 
Life magazine, 33-34 
Loftin, Woody, 11 


M 

Matthews, Joe, 45-46 
McCarthy, Joseph, 18 
McGuire, Phyllis, 20 
Moulin Rouge (Las 
Vegas, Nevada), 10 


N 

National Indian Gaming 
Commission, 50 


Nevada Appeal, 49 
Nevada Gaming Com¬ 
mission, 1-3, 6, 10, 

13, 38, 42-44 
Nevada Gaming Control 
Board, 1-2, 4-7, 9-10, 
12-14, 16, 21-22, 28- 
29, 31-32, 34, 38-40, 
43-44 

Nevada State Journal, 5 
New China Club (Reno, 
Nevada), 10 


O 

Olsen, Edward A., 1, 7- 
11, 13, 20-24, 26-28, 
34, 43, 47-48 
O'Neill, Paul, 33-34 


P 

Pearson, Drew, 25 
Pegler, Westbrook, 25 
Petersen, Pete, 2-3, 6 


R 

Readers Digest, 35 
Reagan, Ronald, 28-29 


53 



INDEX 


S 

Sawyer, Grant, 1, 4-5, 7, 
10-11, 15-20, 25, 31, 
35, 40-41, 43, 48 
Scarne, John, 35 
Schaller, Chris, 7, 40 
Shipler, Guy, 34 
Sica, Joe “Wild Cowboy," 
15 

Silver Slipper (Las Vegas, 
Nevada), 30-31 
Sinatra, Frank, 9, 15-16, 
20-29, 39 
Smith, Sandy, 43 


Sports Illustrated, 34-35 
Stratton, Jack, 10, 28 


T 

Thorp, Edward A., 32-36 
Turner, Ned A., 1, 6 


W 

Walters, Frank E. “Pete," 
2-3 


54 



