An  Interview  with  Marion  Gladding: 

A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of 
Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 

Interviewee:  Marion  Gladding 
Interviewed:  1984 
Published:  1984 
Interviewer:  Ann  Harvey 
UNOHP  Catalog  #119 


Description 

Marion  Andrea  Andreasen  Gladding,  the  daughter  of  Alice  Berry,  a  native  Nevadan,  and  Frederik  Andreasen, 
a  Danish  immigrant,  was  born  in  Virginia  City  on  April  6,  1910.  She  attended  the  First  Ward  and  Fourth  Ward 
schools  in  Virginia  City  and  studied  teaching  at  the  University  of  Nevada.  For  several  years  she  taught  at  a  small 
country  school  near  Fallon,  but  in  1933  she  returned  to  Virginia  City  and  began  working  in  the  post  office,  a  job 
she  held  until  1969  when  she  retired. 

In  her  oral  history  interview,  Marion  Gladding  recounts  the  history  of  the  Berry  family,  a  Nevada  mining  family 
who  operated  their  own  mine  in  the  Flowery  district  during  the  opening  decades  of  the  twentieth  century.  Mrs. 
Gladding  also  reminisces  about  various  buildings  that  used  to  exist  in  the  Flowery  district,  but  which  have  since 
disappeared,  and  thus  provides  the  reader  with  information  on  a  community  about  which  relatively  little  has  been 
previously  recorded.  Mrs.  Gladding  also  tells  of  some  of  her  fathers  early  experiences  in  Nevada  as  an  immigrant. 
Finally,  she  discusses  her  own  active  life,  reminiscing  about  her  childhood  experiences  growing  up  on  the  Comstock, 
of  the  time  she  spent  teaching  in  Fallon,  and  about  her  work  in  the  post  office  in  Virginia  City. 


An  Interview  with  Marion  Gladding 


An  Interview  with  Marion  Gladding 

A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of 
Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


Prepared  for  the  Storey  County,  Nevada 
Board  of  Commissioners 

Major  funding  by  the  Department  of  Interior, 
National  Park  Service  and  the  State  of  Nevada, 
Division  of  Historic  Preservation  and  Archeology 


An  Oral  History  Conducted  by  Ann  Harvey 
August,  24  1984 


University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program 


Copyright  1984 

University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program 
Mail  Stop  0324 
Reno,  Nevada  89557 
unohp  @unr.  edu 
http :  /  /  www.  unr.  edu/  oralhistory 


All  rights  reserved.  Published  1984. 
Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America 


Publication  Staff: 
Director:  R.T.  King 


University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  Use  Policy 

All  UNOHP  interviews  are  copyrighted  materials.  They  may  be  downloaded  and/or 
printed  for  personal  reference  and  educational  use,  but  not  republished  or  sold.  Under 
“fair  use”  standards,  excerpts  of  up  to  1000  words  may  be  quoted  for  publication  without 
UNOHP  permission  as  long  as  the  use  is  non-commercial  and  materials  are  properly 
cited.  The  citation  should  include  the  title  of  the  work,  the  name  of  the  person  or 
people  interviewed,  the  date  of  publication  or  production,  and  the  fact  that  the  work 
was  published  or  produced  by  the  University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  (and 
collaborating  institutions,  when  applicable).  Requests  for  permission  to  quote  for  other 
publication,  or  to  use  any  photos  found  within  the  transcripts,  should  be  addressed 
to  the  UNOHP,  Mail  Stop  0324,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno,  Reno,  NV  89557-0324. 
Original  recordings  of  most  UNOHP  interviews  are  available  for  research  purposes 
upon  request. 


Contents 

Preface  to  the  Digital  Edition  ix 

Original  Preface  xi 

Introduction  xiii 

An  Interview  with  Marion  Gladding  1 

Photographs  2 1 

Original  Index:  For  Reference  Only  25 


Preface  to  the  Digital  Edition 


Established  in  1964,  the  University  of 
Nevada  Oral  History  Program  (UNOHP) 
explores  the  remembered  past  through 
rigorous  oral  history  interviewing,  creating  a 
record  for  present  and  future  researchers.  The 
programs  collection  of  primary  source  oral 
histories  is  an  important  body  of  information 
about  significant  events,  people,  places, 
and  activities  in  twentieth  and  twenty-first 
century  Nevada  and  the  West. 

The  UNOHP  wishes  to  make  the 
information  in  its  oral  histories  accessible 
to  a  broad  range  of  patrons.  To  achieve 
this  goal,  its  transcripts  must  speak  with 
an  intelligible  voice.  However,  no  type  font 
contains  symbols  for  physical  gestures  and 
vocal  modulations  which  are  integral  parts 
of  verbal  communication.  When  human 
speech  is  represented  in  print,  stripped  of 
these  signals,  the  result  can  be  a  morass  of 
seemingly  tangled  syntax  and  incomplete 
sentences — totally  verbatim  transcripts 
sometimes  verge  on  incoherence.  Therefore, 
this  transcript  has  been  lightly  edited. 


While  taking  great  pains  not  to  alter 
meaning  in  any  way,  the  editor  may  have 
removed  false  starts,  redundancies,  and  the 
“uhs,”  “ahs,”  and  other  noises  with  which 
speech  is  often  liberally  sprinkled;  compressed 
some  passages  which,  in  unaltered  form, 
misrepresent  the  chroniclers  meaning;  and 
relocated  some  material  to  place  information 
in  its  intended  context.  Laughter  is  represented 
with  [laughter]  at  the  end  of  a  sentence  in 
which  it  occurs,  and  ellipses  are  used  to 
indicate  that  a  statement  has  been  interrupted 
or  is  incomplete. .  .or  that  there  is  a  pause  for 
dramatic  effect. 

As  with  all  of  our  oral  histories,  while 
we  can  vouch  for  the  authenticity  of  the 
interviews  in  the  UNOHP  collection,  we 
advise  readers  to  keep  in  mind  that  these  are 
remembered  pasts,  and  we  do  not  claim  that 
the  recollections  are  entirely  free  of  error. 
We  can  state,  however,  that  the  transcripts 
accurately  reflect  the  oral  history  recordings 
on  which  they  were  based.  Accordingly,  each 
transcript  should  be  approached  with  the 


X 


Marion  Gladding 


same  prudence  that  the  intelligent  reader 
exercises  when  consulting  government 
records,  newspaper  accounts,  diaries,  and 
other  sources  of  historical  information. 
All  statements  made  here  constitute  the 
remembrance  or  opinions  of  the  individuals 
who  were  interviewed,  and  not  the  opinions 
of  the  UNOHP. 

In  order  to  standardize  the  design  of  all 
UNOHP  transcripts  for  the  online  database, 
most  have  been  reformatted,  a  process  that 
was  completed  in  2012.  This  document  may 
therefore  differ  in  appearance  and  pagination 
from  earlier  printed  versions.  Rather  than 
compile  entirely  new  indexes  for  each  volume, 
the  UNOHP  has  made  each  transcript  fully 
searchable  electronically.  If  a  previous  version 
of  this  volume  existed,  its  original  index  has 
been  appended  to  this  document  for  reference 
only.  A  link  to  the  entire  catalog  can  be  found 
online  at  http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For  more  information  on  the  UNOHP 
or  any  of  its  publications,  please  contact  the 
University  of  Nevada  Oral  History  Program  at 
Mail  Stop  0324,  University  of  Nevada,  Reno, 
NV,  89557-0324  or  by  calling  775/784-6932. 

Alicia  Barber 
Director,  UNOHP 
July  2012 


Original  Preface 


The  University  of  Nevada  Oral  History 
Program  (OHP)  engages  in  systematic 
interviewing  of  persons  who  can  provide 
firsthand  descriptions  of  events,  people  and 
places  that  give  history  its  substance.  The 
products  of  this  research  are  the  tapes  of  the 
interviews  and  their  transcriptions. 

In  themselves,  oral  history  interviews 
are  not  history.  However,  they  often  contain 
valuable  primary  source  material,  as  useful  in 
the  process  of  historiographical  synthesization 
as  the  written  sources  to  which  historians  have 
customarily  turned.  Verifying  the  accuracy  of 
all  of  the  statements  made  in  the  course  of  an 
interview  would  require  more  time  and  money 
than  the  OHP  s  operating  budget  permits.  The 
program  can  vouch  that  the  statements  were 
made,  but  it  cannot  attest  that  they  are  free 
of  error.  Accordingly,  oral  histories  should 
be  read  with  the  same  prudence  that  the 
reader  exercises  when  consulting  government 
records,  newspaper  accounts,  diaries  and 
other  sources  of  historical  information. 

It  is  the  policy  of  the  OHP  to  produce 
transcripts  that  are  as  close  to  verbatim  as 


possible,  but  some  alteration  of  the  text  is 
generally  both  unavoidable  and  desirable. 
Then  human  speech  is  captured  in  print  the 
result  can  be  a  morass  of  tangled  syntax,  false 
starts  and  incomplete  sentences,  sometimes 
verging  on  incoherency.  The  type  font  contains 
no  symbols  for  the  physical  gestures  and  the 
diverse  vocal  modulations  that  are  integral 
parts  of  communication  through  speech. 
Experience  shows  that  totally  verbatim 
transcripts  are  often  totally  unreadable 
and  therefore  a  total  waste  of  the  resources 
expended  in  their  production.  While  keeping 
alterations  to  a  minimum  the  OHP  will,  in 
preparing  a  text: 

a.  generally  delete  false  starts,  redundancies 
and  the  uhs,  ahs  and  other  noises  with  which 
speech  is  often  liberally  sprinkled; 

b.  occasionally  compress  language  that 
would  be  confusing  to  the  reader  in  unaltered 
form; 

c.  rarely  shift  a  portion  of  a  transcript  to 
place  it  in  its  proper  context;  and 

d.  enclose  in  [brackets]  explanatory 
information  or  words  that  were  not  uttered 


Marion  Gladding 


xii 


but  have  been  added  to  render  the  text 
intelligible. 

There  will  be  readers  who  prefer  to  take 
their  oral  history  straight,  without  even 
the  minimal  editing  that  occurred  in  the 
production  of  this  text;  they  are  directed  to 
the  tape  recording. 

Copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  and  the 
tape  recording  from  which  it  is  derived  are 
available  from: 

The  University  of  Nevada 
Oral  History  Program 
Mailstop  0324 

University  of  Nevada,  Reno  89557 
(775)  784-6932 


Introduction 


Marion  Andrea  Andreasen  Gladding,  the 
daughter  of  Alice  Berry,  a  native  Nevadan,  and 
of  Frederik  Andreasen,  a  Danish  immigrant, 
was  born  in  Virginia  City  6  April  1910.  She 
attended  the  First  Ward  and  Fourth  Ward 
schools  in  Virginia  City  and  studied  teaching 
at  the  University  of  Nevada.  For  several  years 
she  taught  at  a  small  country  school  near 
Fallon,  but  in  1933  she  returned  to  Virginia 
City  and  began  working  in  the  post  office,  a 
job  she  held  until  1969  when  she  retired. 

In  her  oral  history  interview  Marion 
Gladding  recounts  the  history  of  the  Berry 
family,  a  Nevada  mining  family  who  operated 
their  own  mine  in  the  Flowery  district  during 
the  opening  decades  of  the  twentieth  century. 
Mrs.  Gladding  also  reminisces  about  various 
structures  that  used  to  exist  in  the  Flowery 
district,  but  which  have  since  disappeared, 
and  thus  provides  the  reader  with  information 
on  a  community  about  which  relatively 
little  has  been  previously  recorded.  Mrs. 
Gladding  also  tells  of  some  of  her  father  s  early 
experiences  in  Nevada  as  an  immigrant,  and 
thus  adds  to  a  growing  body  of  knowledge  on 


the  immigrant  experience  in  Nevada.  Finally, 
she  discusses  her  own  active  life,  reminiscing 
about  her  childhood  experiences  growing 
up  on  the  Comstock,  of  the  time  she  spent 
teaching  in  Fallon,  and  about  her  work  in  the 
post  office  in  Virginia  City. 

Today  Marion  Gladding,  a  warm  and 
charming  woman,  lives  in  Virginia  City  with 
her  husband,  Edward  Gladding.  They  have  2 
grown  children,  Edward  Allen  and  Frederik 
James,  and  4  grandchildren. 


Marion  Gladding 
1984 


An  Interview  with 
Marion  Gladding 


Marion  Gladding:  My  full  name  is  Marion 
Andrea  Andreasen  Gladding.  I  was  born  on 
Washington  Street  in  Virginia  City,  Nevada — 
Storey  County — 6  April  1910.  Washington 
Street  is  one  of  the  side  streets  that  leads 
from  C  Street  down  toward  the  hospital.  [The 
doctor  who  delivered  me  was]  Fred  Hodgins. 
My  fathers  name  was  Frederik  Andreasen; 
my  mother’s  name  was  Alice  Berry — they  had 
no  middle  name.  I  had  3  brothers:  Frederik 
Alvin  Andreasen,  Clinton  Bendt  Andreasen 
and  Earl  Nels  Andreasen. 

Ann  Harvey:  Who  was  the  first  member  of 
your  mother’s  family  to  move  to  the  Comstock? 

My  grandfather,  Thomas  James  Berry, 
came  to  this  area  from  England  in  1873. 
He  was  following  his  stepfather  who  had 
left  England  and  had  taken  the  records  of 
his  [Thomas  Berry’s]  birth  with  him.  My 
grandfather  [wanted]  to  get  them  back 
because  of  an  inheritance,  but  he  never  caught 
up  with  him,  so  he  could  never  claim  his 
inheritance. 


Grandfather  came  to  Virginia  City  right  at 
the  height  of  its  boom  days.  He  was  impressed 
not  only  with  the  boom  and  all  the  activity, 
but  with  the  country  and  its  beauty.  At  that 
time  he  became  familiar  with  Six  Mile  Canyon 
and  the  Flowery  district,  and  he  had  it  in  his 
mind  to  make  his  permanent  home  [here]. 
He  went  back  to  England  and  married  my 
grandmother,  Sarah  Jane  Bentham,  in  a  small 
town  named  Hulme  in  Lancaster  County, 
England.  They  had  3  little  girls,  the  younger 
one  of  the  3  was  born  in  1880,  and  soon  after 
that  they  returned  to  Virginia  City,  Nevada. 
They  settled  in  Seven  Mile  Canyon,  which  is 
in  the  Flowery  district. 

Where  is  that  located? 

It’s  east  of  Virginia  City.  There  are  2 
canyons,  Seven  Mile  Canyon  and  Six  Mile 
Canyon,  which  together  comprise  the  whole 
of  the  Flowery  district.  The  mouth  of  Six  Mile 
Canyon  is  not  even  half  a  mile  from  Virginia 
City,  and  Seven  Mile  Canyon  runs  into  Six 
Mile  Canyon. 


2 


Marion  Gladding 


What  did  your  grandfather  do  after  he  came 
hack  and  settled  with  your  grandmother  in  the 
Flowery  district ? 

They  lived  in  Seven  Mile  Canyon,  and  he 
worked  in  the  mines  in  Virginia  City  The  first 
winter  was  very  difficult  for  him.  It  was  a  bad 
winter,  and  he  had  to  walk  from  his  home  in 
Seven  Mile  Canyon  to  his  place  of  work.  He 
[used]  to  tell  us  about  the  coyotes  tracking 
him  up  Seven  Mile  Canyon:  when  he  stopped, 
they  stopped;  when  he  moved,  they  moved. 

He  was  getting  a  little  nervous? 

I’m  sure  he  was.  [laughter]  Well,  they 
didn’t  live  in  Seven  Mile  Canyon  very  long. 
He  built  a  home  in  Six  Mile  Canyon.  It  was  a 
large  house  because  his  family  was  increasing 
all  the  time. 

Then  your  grandfather  was  a  miner  when  he 
came  back  to  Virginia  City? 

That  is  what  he  did  when  he  came  to 
Virginia  City;  before  that,  in  England,  he  was  a 
carpenter.  He  became  very  well  known  [here] . 
They  called  him  “Strawberry”  because  he  had 
red  hair.  He  was  very  talented  and  could  sing 
and  dance  and  was  in  demand  at  parties  and 
entertainments.  He  had  a  very  good  time,  I’m 
sure. 

Were  there  many  houses  in  Six  Mile  Canyon 
when  your  grandparents  settled  there? 

Yes,  and  not  only  houses  but  [other 
structures  as  well] . 

Could  you  tell  me  of  some  of  these  structures? 

At  the  head  of  Six  Mile  Canyon  is  the 
Storey  County  Hospital,  and  a  little  further 


down  was  Schnitzer’s  brewery,  a  beautiful  old 
building,  which  was  in  very  good  condition 
until  1983  when  it  burned  down.  The 
Schnitzer  family  made  their  own  beer,  and 
the  brewery  was  a  very  popular  place  with 
the  miners  coming  off  of  shift  and  with  other 
people  around  Virginia  City.  Then,  further 
down  the  canyon,  there  was  another  small 
saloon  run  by  a  petite  little  lady  named  Fanny 
O’Mare.  Now,  Fanny  was  supposed  to  be 
French;  she  spoke  French  fluently  and  cooked 
French  meals,  but  apparently  she  was  also 
Irish  because  she  spoke  with  an  Irish  accent — 
it  was  a  nice  combination.  I  remember  Fanny 
O’Mare. 

Did  she  serve  French  meals  in  her  saloon? 

Only  to  her  friends.  Her  way  of  cooking 
was  different  from  my  grandparents’,  but 
they  were  among  some  of  her  guests.  My 
grandfather  especially  liked  the  way  she 
cooked  leg  of  lamb,  so  he  bought  a  leg  of  lamb, 
and  she  fixed  it  for  him  with  slits  and  inserted 
garlic  in  the  lamb.  When  he  brought  it  home 
my  grandmother  threw  it  out;  she  thought  it 
was  bad!  [laughter] 

Further  down  the  canyon  there  was 
another  saloon  operated  by  a  family  by  the 
name  of  Carney.  It  was  in  a  small  building, 
and  there  was  a  spring  right  at  the  saloon.  In 
fact,  there  was  a  spring  at  Fanny  O’Mare’s,  too. 
That  was  one  reason  they  built  the  saloons  at 
these  places. .  .because  people  passing  by  with 
horses  would  stop  and  water  their  horses  and 
refresh  themselves  at  the  same  time. 

There  was  a  creek  that  flowed  down  the 
whole  length  of  Six  Mile  Canyon  beginning 
at  Virginia  City,  and  there  were  mills  along 
the  creek.  [One  of]  the  larger  ones  was  the 
Butters  mill,  built  by  a  man  by  the  name  of 
Charles  Butters.  It  was  said  of  Mr.  Butters  that 
he  only  hired  Strong  young  men — this  was  the 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


3 


first  place  my  father  worked  when  he  came  to 
Nevada.  Further  up  the  canyon  Mr.  Butters 
had  a  mansion.  It  was  later  torn  down  and 
sold  for  the  brick  and  the  materials  that  were 
in  it. 

Do  you  remember  what  Butters  mansion 
looked  like ? 

Yes.  It  was  made  of  brick,  and,  as  I 
remember,  it  was  3  stories  tall.  The  brick 
was  made  in  Virginia  City,  and  it  had  a 
distinctive  color — a  pinkish-red  color.  The 
brick  was  very  much  in  demand,  and  that 
is  why  it  was  torn  down  in  the  1920s.  The 
Butters  mansion  had  beautiful  grounds  with 
a  garden  and  large  trees.  This  was  another 
place  my  father  worked  when  he  first  came 
to  this  country;  he  helped  take  care  of  the 
gardens. 

Then  there  were  small  mills  all  the  way 
down  Six  Mile  Canyon  along  the  creek.  The 
people  [who]  had  these  small  properties 
worked  the  ore  from  their  own  mines  in 
these  mills,  and  many  of  them  did  custom 
milling  from  different  peoples  mines.  They 
also  worked  the  tailings  that  came  down  the 
creek  from  Virginia  City.  One  was  the  Fisher 
mill,  which  was  owned  by  Frank  Fisher’s 
grandmother  and  grandfather.  At  the  foot 
of  Six  Mile  Canyon  there  was  another  mill, 
a  larger  one,  owned  by  some  people  by  the 
name  of  Pfiefer. 

A  little  further  up  there  was  a  man  by 
the  name  of  John  Barrett  who  had  a  pretty 
little  home  and  a  garden.  And  further  up 
the  canyon  a  man  by  the  name  of  William 
Rowe  and  his  wife  had  a  fruit  orchard  with 
apples,  pears,  peaches  and  just  about  anything 
you  wanted.  It  was  wonderful  in  those  days 
because  everybody  didn’t  have  fresh  fruit  like 
we  do  now.  I  can  remember  going  to  William 
Rowe’s  orchard.  He  watered  it  from  a  big  well 


that  he  had  at  the  bottom  of  the  orchard.  It 
was  there  for  many  years. 

In  Seven  Mile  Canyon  there  was  another 
big  stone  mansion;  I  don’t  know  who  built 
that,  but  it  was  moved  by  Abraham  Kendall 
up  into  Virginia  City  and  now  stands  on 
the  Divide.  He  moved  it  stone  by  stone,  and 
marked  every  stone  so  that  he  would  get  it  in 
the  right  place.  The  home  stands  right  on  the 
ridge  of  the  Divide. 

My  grandmother  and  grandfather  were 
perhaps  the  last  family  to  leave  Six  Mile 
Canyon;  by  this  time  they  had  had  9  children. 
Two  of  them  had  died.  There  was  Sarah  Emma 
Berry,  Ada  Berry,  Marion  Berry,  Thomas 
Berry,  William  Berry,  Clara  Berry,  Alice 
Berry,  Earl  Berry  and  Ethel  Berry. 

Do  you  have  any  stories  you’d  like  to  tell  us 
about  the  Berry  family? 

My  uncle,  William  Berry,  was  a  prospector, 
and  he  used  to  prospect  along  all  the  hills 
around  Six  Mile  Canyon  and  Seven  Mile 
Canyon.  One  day  he  was  sitting  on  a  rock 
eating  his  lunch.  He  broke  a  piece  of  the  rock 
off,  looked  at  it,  and  [realized]  it  was  almost 
solid  gold.  He  had  made  a  big  strike!  The 
[family]  tried  to  keep  it  a  secret,  but  this  was 
an  impossibility. 

Anyway,  William,  his  brothers  and  his 
father  worked  this  mine  for  years  and  made 
a  very  good  living  off  of  it.  They  sunk  a  shaft 
on  the  property  and  hauled  the  ore  up  from 
the  mine  on  a  windlass  with  a  big  bucket. 
The  windlass  was  hitched  to  a  horse,  which 
my  grandfather  drove,  and  the  3  boys  dug 
in  the  mine,  filled  the  buckets,  and  did  the 
hard  labor.  But  the  horse  stepped  on  my 
grandfather’s  foot  and  broke  his  foot,  so  they 
got  their  younger  sister,  Ethel — who  is  now 
84  years  old — to  drive  the  horse.  She  drove  it 
for  a  number  of  months. 


4 


Marion  Gladding 


The  mine  was  very  rich,  and  it  became 
difficult  for  the  family  to  work  because  it  was 
too  big,  [so]  they  finally  decided  to  sell  it.  They 
sold  the  Berry  mine  to  the  Flowery  Mining 
Company,  which  owned  a  number  of  other 
properties  in  the  neighborhood.  The  Flowery 
Mining  Company  built  a  huge  mill  on  the 
property  and  operated  it  until  the  late  1930s. 
Then  the  mill  was  moved  piece  by  piece  down 
to  the  Dayton  Mining  Company  property  in 
lower  Silver  City,  where  it  still  stands. 

What  did  the  family  do  after  they  sold  the  mine ? 

They  had  done  quite  well  with  their  mine, 
and  [although]  they  were  not  millionaires, 
at  least  they  had  enough  so  that  they  didn’t 
have  to  work  in  the  mines  any  longer.  My 
grandfather  died  on  30  December  1924 — 
New  Year’s  Eve —  and  my  grandmother  died 
10  May  1925.  They  were  the  only  family  that 
lived  in  the  Flowery  district  at  that  time. 

Could  you  tell  us  some  more  stories  about  your 
family? 

Well,  when  Ethel — she  was  the  youngest 
one  of  the  family — was  born,  one  of  my 
grandfather’s  favorite  songs  was  “  The 
Mulberry  Bush,”  and  when  the  notice  of  her 
birth  came  out  in  the  Territorial  Enterprise  it 
said,  “There  is  another  Berry  on  the  mulberry 
bush;  born  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thomas  Berry  of 
Six  Mile  Canyon,  a  daughter.”  She  still  lives 
in  Carson  City  at  the  Sierra  Convalescent 
Center. 

The  youngest  boy,  Earl,  ran  away  from 
home  when  he  was  18  years  old  and  joined 
the  army  during  World  War  I....  He  didn’t 
actually  run  away  from  home;  he  was  old 
enough  to  leave  at  that  time,  but  he  joined 
the  army  and  had  some  real  experiences. 


He  was  on  a  troop  ship  named  the  Toscania. 
It  was  torpedoed  in  the  North  Sea,  and  he 
was  in  icy  waters  until  he  was  picked  up 
by  some  Irish  fishermen.  They  nursed  him 
back  to  health,  and  [eventually]  he  rejoined 
his  company  in  the  army.  He  was  in  the 
Battle  of  the  Argonne  Forest,  went  through 
the  whole  European  campaign  and  then 
returned  to  the  United  States.  Later,  around 
1920,  he  became  one  of  the  first  motorcycle 
cops  in  Reno.  There  were  2  of  them  at  that 
time,  and  he  was  one;  the  other  was  William 
Dean. 

I  remember  something  [else]  about  my 
uncles.  They  used  to  have  drilling  contests 
during  celebrations  in  Virginia  City — 
this  is  when  2  men  would  drill  with  big 
sledgehammers.  My  uncles,  Thomas  Berry 
and  William  Berry,  were  the  state  champions 
for  7  years,  and  were  also  national  champions 
for  a  while.  This  tradition  is  still  carried  on 
by  a  younger  member  of  the  family,  Fred 
Andreasen,  my  nephew,  who  is  the  state  single 
jack  drilling  champion,  and  he  was  also  the 
national  single  jack  drilling  champion,  I  think, 
for  2  years. 

Are  there  several  different  kinds  of  drilling 
contests? 

Two  different  kinds. 

Could  you  explain  those? 

The  double  jack  drilling  contest  simulates 
the  way  the  miners  drilled  in  the  mines 
during  the  early  days.  Two  men  would  drill 
[with]  these  long  pieces  of  steel  and  would 
hammer  them  into  the  stone  with  big  heavy 
hammers.  It  was  a  very  rhythmic  procedure: 
one  would  hit,  and  by  the  time  he  would  raise 
his  hammer,  the  other  would  hit  the  steel.  The 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


5 


team  that  drilled  the  deepest  hole  would  be 
the  champions. 

A  single  jack  is  when  one  man  uses  a 
shorter  hammer,  and  he  drills  all  by  himself. 
Somebody  plays  a  small  stream  of  water  while 
he  is  drilling  to  keep  the  hole  clear.  [Again], 
the  one  that  drills  the  deepest  hole  is  the 
winner  and  the  champion. 

Thank  you  for  clarifying  that.  Where  did  your 
aunts  and  uncles  go  to  school? 

All  my  aunts  and  uncles  attended  school 
in  the  Flowery  district.  There  was  a  small 
schoolhouse  in  just  about  the  center  of  Six 
Mile  Canyon — it  was  right  next  to  the  house 
that  the  Fisher  family  lived  in.  It  stood  for 
many,  many  years  but  finally  deteriorated 
and  fell  down.  All  the  children  in  the  Flowery 
district  attended  school  there.  The  teacher 
drove  down  in  the  morning  from  Virginia 
City  with  a  horse  and  buggy,  and  then  drove 
home  at  night. 

There  were  8  grades.  My  mother  attended 
school  in  the  Flowery  district  through  the 
eighth  grade  ,and  then  came  to  Virginia 
City.  At  that  time  there  were  only  3  classes 
in  high  school:  freshman  class,  middle  class 
and  senior  class.  She  graduated  from  the 
senior  class  in  Virginia  City  in  about  1908. 
She  would  have  been  1 7  years  old.  My  mother 
and  father  were  married  when  she  was  18  on 
13  September  1909. 

You  just  mentioned  your  father  Why  don’t  we 
talk  about  him  now? 

My  father,  Frederick  Andreasen,  was 
born  in  Copenhagen,  Denmark,  on  10 
September  1882.  He  came  to  this  country 
when  he  was  17  years  old  “around  the 
Horn,”  as  they  called  it.  The  first  place  that 


he  went  to  was  San  Francisco,  and  he  was 
there  in  1906  during  the  big  earthquake. 
He  couldn’t  speak  English,  and  when  he 
wanted  to  eat  and  went  to  a  restaurant, 
he  had  to  point  to  what  he  wanted.  It  was 
difficult,  but  he  soon  learned  [to  speak 
English]. 

He  came  to  Reno,  Nevada,  because  his 
sister  was  in  Reno.  She  and  her  husband 
owned  the  old  Monarch  Cafe  on  Virginia 
Street.  They  were  the  first  owners  of  the 
Monarch  Cafe.  Their  name  was  Vorm;  it’s 
familiar  to  a  lot  of  the  older  people.  There  were 
a  lot  of  Danish  people  in  Reno  at  that  time.  My 
father  stayed  there,  worked  in  the  Monarch 
Cafe  and  learned  to  cook — he  called  himself 
a  short-order  cook.  He  [eventually]  came  to 
Virginia  City  with  a  group  of  young  men  by 
way  of  Jumbo  Grade. 

What? 

Jumbo  Grade.  Jumbo  Grade  still  exists, 
although  it’s  not  passable  right  now  because 
a  road  is  being  reconstructed.  There  used  to 
be  a  small  town  at  the  foot  of  Jumbo  Grade, 
close  to  Washoe  Lake,  named  Jumbo.  It  was 
a  mining  community,  and  quite  a  town  at 
that  time.  My  father  stopped  there  and  then 
worked  his  way  up  to  Virginia  City.  At  that 
time  there  were  dances  and  lots  of  activity  in 
Virginia  City,  and  he  decided  he  would  stay. 
He  got  himself  a  job  at  the  Butters  plant,  and 
he  worked  there  for  a  short  time. 

He  met  my  mother;  they  were  married  in 
1909,  and  they  settled  in  Virginia  City.  They 
lived  in  Virginia  City  until  after  I  was  born; 
then  they  lived  in  a  small  house  down  in  Six 
Mile  Canyon  until  I  was  6  years  old.  My  2 
oldest  brothers  were  also  born  in  Virginia 
City  before  they  moved  down  there,  and  my 
youngest  brother  was  born  here  afterwards. 


6 


Marion  Gladding 


When  it  became  time  for  me  to  go  to  school 
they  moved  to  Virginia  City,  and  I  started 
school  in  the  First  Ward  School,  which  no 
longer  exists. 

Did  your  father  ever  tell  you  about  his  job 
working  in  the  mill? 

He  was  the  one  that  told  me  that  Mr. 
Butters  hired  none  but  strong  young  men,  and 
he  was  treated  very  nicely.  Mr.  Butters  liked 
him  and  asked  him  if  he  would  like  to  work 
in  his  garden,  which  he  accepted,  but  he  went 
back  to  the  mill — he  didn’t  like  gardening. 

What  did  he  do  in  the  mill?  Did  he  ever  tell  you? 

No,  because  he  went  into  mining  soon 
after  that.  He  used  to  say  he  was  a  hard  rock 
miner;  he  was  never  a  mill  man.  [laughter] 
Actually  my  father  was  a  timber  man.  He 
did  the  square-set  timbering  and  was  very 
good  at  it.  He  was  also  very  good  at  handling 
powder,  handling  dynamite,  and  there’s  quite 
a  connection  there  because  that’s  a  job  where 
they  have  to  be  very  careful.  My  father  worked 
in  the  Flowery  mine  in  the  Flowery  district, 
and  during  the  time  that  he  worked  there  he 
was  caved  on — that’s  a  mining  accident.  When 
the  walls  of  the  mine  caved  in  on  him,  he  was 
buried,  and  this  accident  almost  killed  him. 
But,  he  survived  that  and  survived  another 
cave-in  later  on.  My  uncle,  Thomas  Berry,  was 
also  caved  on  in  the  Flowery  mine. 

Was  mining  a  dangerous  occupation? 

Yes,  it  was  a  very  dangerous  occupation. 
My  father  then  moved  to  Virginia  City,  and  he 
worked  in  the  Con-Virginia  mine  and  others. 
He  died  when  he  was  55  years  old,  and  at  the 
time  of  his  death  he  was  working  for  William 
Donovan  at  the  Silver  Hill  mine  in  Silver  City. 


When  did  your  father  die? 

My  father  died  17  September  1938. 
His  birthday  was  10  September.  He  died  of 
silicosis,  which  is  a  disease  that  the  miners  get 
from  breathing  too  much  dust.  It  deteriorates 
their  lungs,  and  then  they  get  tuberculosis.  My 
father  died  from  this,  as  did  my  grandfather 
and  2  of  my  uncles.  They  all  died  of  silicosis 
when  they  were  comparatively  young  men. 
One  uncle  died  when  he  was  52  and  the  other 
when  he  was  55. 

That’s  very  tragic.  Was  there  any  way  to  cut 
down  on  this  tragedy? 

Yes.  They  played  streams  of  water  on  the 
walls  of  the  mine  where  they  were  working, 
but  at  that  time  the  men  weren’t  too  careful. 
Now  they  are,  and  they  wear  masks  to  keep 
from  breathing  the  dust. 

Did  your  father  ever  tell  you  of  any  experiences 
he  had  while  he  actually  worked  in  the  mines? 

Well,  he  told  me  about  the  “tommyknockers.” 

Would  you  explain  tommyknockers? 

The  tommyknockers  were  a  superstition. 
The  miners  used  to  say  whenever  an  accident 
was  about  to  happen,  they  were  warned  by 
a  knocking  on  the  walls  or  by  voices  that 
they  heard.  They  called  these  noises  the 
tommyknockers.  It  was  mostly  knocking  they 
heard,  and  they  were  very  superstitious. 

Did  your  father  ever  tell  you  of  any  other 
superstitions  the  miners  had  besides  the 
tommyknockers? 

My  dad  was  not  a  superstitious  man,  so 
he  didn’t  go  into  it  too  deeply,  but  he  did 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


7 


tell  us  about  the  tommyknockers.  I  guess  he 
heard  them,  too.  [laughter]  It  was  probably 
a  sloughing  off  of  the  rocks  or  the  dirt,  or 
the  timbers  would  creak  or  something  like 
that,  but  there  was  always  noises  and  then 
there  would  be  an  accident... there  were  many 
accidents  in  those  days. 

Do  you  remember  any  of  the  accidents  that 
your  father  may  have  told  you  about  besides 
the  cave-ins  he  was  involved  in? 

Yes,  they  had  a  signal  in  the  mines — I  can 
remember  this  as  a  child.  They  would  blow  the 
steam  whistles  so  many  times — it  seems  to  me 
it  was  4  times,  but  I’m  not  sure  of  that — to  let 
the  people  in  the  town  know  that  there  had 
been  an  accident  in  the  mine.  There  were 
many  big  accidents,  like  the  Savage  fire  where 
many  men  were  killed.  But  the  only  2  times 
that  my  father  was  in  an  accident  was  in  the 
Flowery  mine. 

Did  your  father  ever  tell  you  about  any  of  the 
men  he  worked  with  in  the  mines? 

Oh,  yes.  When  he  was  a  little  older  my 
father  used  to  lease  in  the  mines.  He  and 
another  man  would  take  a  lease  on  a  certain 
area  in  a  mine  and  work  it,  and  they  could 
make  their  own  milling,  and  whatever  they 
made  out  of  it  they  could  keep.  One  of  my 
fathers  partners  was  Johnny  the  Giant.  His 
real  name  was  Johnny  Martinsen,  and  he  was 
also  a  Scandinavian,  [so]  they  had  something 
in  common.  Johnny  the  Giant  was  a  very  short 
man.  He  was  probably  about  5  feet  tall,  but  he 
was  almost  as  broad  as  he  was  tall — not  fat. 
He  was  just  a  husky  man,  but  very  short.  He 
and  another  man,  called  Cry  Baby  Tony,  were 
killed  in  a  mining  accident  in  what  is  known 
as  the  Con-Virginia  tunnel  in  a  cave-in.  Oh, 
there  were  any  number  of  accidents. 


My  father  worked  in  the  Con-Virginia 
and  other  deep  mines  where  the  temperature 
was  over  100  degrees  at  all  times.  They  either 
played  hoses  on  one  another  so  they  could 
stand  the  heat,  or  they  had  tubs  of  ice  water 
where  they  soaked  their  clothing  so  they 
could  work  for  a  longer  length  of  time. 

We’ve  been  told  that  pneumonia  was  a  problem 
for  those  who  worked  in  the  mines. 

That  was  probably  because  of  the  great 
change  of  temperatures,  especially  in  the 
wintertime.  They  would  come  out  of  the  cold 
of  Virginia  City  and  the  terrific  storms — 
wind  storms  and  snow  storms — and  go  into 
the  hot  mines.  The  change  of  temperature 
caused  them  to  catch  cold  and  lower  their 
resistance.  [Then]  they  would  get  pneumonia 
very  easily. 

Do  you  remember  the  names  of  any  of  the  other 
men  your  father  worked  with? 

Yes.  There  was  Crack  em  Down  Mike.  He 
was  a  tough  man  who  always  said,  “I’ll  crack 
em  down,”  when  something  happened  that  he 
didn’t  like.  And  at  this  time,  there  were  many 
Slovenian  people  who  came  to  Virginia  City. 

About  what  time  was  that? 

This  was  probably  in  the  1930s  and  1940s. 
Of  course,  the  mines  all  closed  down  in  the 
1940s.  Gold  and  silver  were  declared  non- 
strategic  by  the  United  States  government, 
and  they  closed  down  all  the  mines.  But  in 
my  time  there  was  3,500  men  working  in  the 
mines  between  Virginia  City  and  Gold  Hill. 
All  the  mines  were  operating,  and  it  was  really 
exciting. 

Was  this  between  1920  and  1930? 


8 


Marion  Gladding 


Yes,  while  I  was  still  going  to  high  school. 
There  were  also  a  lot  of  Mexican  men  who 
came  to  town  and  lived  in  boardinghouses 
about  that  time.  They  all  congregated  together. 
There  were  also  Finnish  miners  and  Irish 
miners. 

Did  any  of  the  Slovenians  ever  tell  you  why 
they  moved  here? 

No.  They  were  very  fine  people.  We  were 
neighbors  to  one  Slovenian  family,  and  I 
still  consider  one  of  the  daughters,  Mary 
Nicklanovich,  my  very  best  friend.  Mary  tried 
to  teach  me  Slovenian,  and  then  laughed  at 
me  when  I  mispronounced  a  word!  Her  son, 
Mark,  was  born  on  north  A  Street  in  a  house 
right  up  the  street  from  us,  [as]  was  Mickey. 
I  was  the  first  one  to  hold  Mickey.  Mary  Ellen 
was  born  in  Lovelock. 

Were  there  different  areas  of  the  community  in 
which  different  ethnic  groups  would  live? 

Not  really.. .but  the  Mexican  people 
congregated  together.  Most  of  them  were 
unmarried  and  lived  in  boardinghouses 
in  the  southern  part  of  town,  beyond  the 
Fourth  Ward  School.  The  Slovenian  people 
just  blended  in  with  the  population.  I  can 
remember  a  few  of  them  like  Handsome 
Dan.  Handsome  Dan  was  a  Slovenian  man 
who  worked  in  the  mines  here,  and  he  was 
handsome.  And  there  was  Big  Sam  Kerpan 
who  was  huge;  he  was  one  of  the  miners.  I’m 
not  sure  whether  he’s  still  alive  or  not.  When 
he  left  here  he  went  to  Sacramento.  Then 
Andy  Nicklanovich  had  a  restaurant  here;  it 
was  located  right  next  to  the  Delta  Saloon  on 
C  Street.  It  was  a  very  good  restaurant — they 
were  very  good  people.  His  wife’s  mother, 
brothers  and  sisters  all  lived  here. 


Well,  there  were  Irish,  Finns,  Mexicans  and 
Slovenians  living  here  in  the  1920s.  Can  you 
think  of  any  other  ethnic  group  that  lived  here 
at  that  time? 

Well,  the  Cornish  people.  They  called  the 
Cornish  miners  “Cousin  Jacks,”  because  when 
they  got  a  job  they  always  said,  “Do  you  have 
a  job  for  my  Cousin  Jack?”  So,  they  called 
them  Cousin  Jacks,  and  the  women  were 
called  Cousin  Jennys.  They  were  the  ones  who 
made  pasties.  Well,  this  isn’t  altogether  true 
because  my  grandmother  was  pure  English — 
actually  part  Scotch  and  part  English — and 
she  made  pasties,  but  the  Cornish  people,  the 
Cousin  Jennys,  made  wonderful  pasties;  they 
were  little  pies.  Potatoes,  onions  and  meat 
were  put  together  in  a  crust  and  then  baked. 
They  would  wrap  them  in  heavy  papers — 
newspapers — and  put  them  in  the  miners’ 
lunches. 

What  did  the  miners  carry  their  lunches  in? 

Well,  there  were  2  different  kinds  of 
lunch  buckets.  The  one  that  I  remember  best, 
because  my  father  always  carried  it,  was  a 
round  lunch  pail  about  9  inches  in  diameter 
and  about  12  or  14  inches  high.  In  the  bottom 
part  of  the  lunch  pail  was  a  place  for  their 
drinks,  like  tea  or  coffee.  My  father,  being 
Danish,  drank  coffee.  Then  there  was  a  place 
for  their  sandwiches  or  fruit,  and  whatever 
else  they  brought  to  eat.  In  the  top  there  was 
a  place  for  a  piece  of  pie  or  a  piece  of  cake. 
There  was  another  kind,  which  was  more 
or  less  oblong,  and  worked  along  the  same 
principle.  Then,  in  later  years,  they  carried 
the  Thermos  bottle  and  regular  lunch  pails. 

Were  there  other  ethnic  groups  your  father 
worked  with  in  the  mines? 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


9 


When  he  first  came  to  the  Comstock  there 
were  mostly  Irish  and  English  men  [in  the 
mines].  I  can  remember  one  in  particular — 
Dan  O’Connor.  I  can  still  see  him.  He  was  an 
Irish  man — very  funny  and  very  tough — and 
my  father  liked  him  very  much.  He  had  to  be 
a  fine  man.  [laughter] 

Did  your  father  belong  to  the  Miners’  Union ? 

My  father  belonged  to  the  Miners’ 
Union — all  the  miners  belonged  to  the 
Miners’  Union.  There  were  a  few  strikes,  but 
very  few.  My  father  [supported]  his  family 
on  $4  a  day  [until]  he  went  to  work  in  Silver 
City  at  the  Silver  Hill  mine.  He  was  the  boss 
[there],  and  he  was  in  charge  of  the  whole 
mine.  When  he  got  that  job,  he  got  $10  a 
day,  and  we  thought  that  was  wonderful. 

So,  from  1910  until  he  worked  in  Silver  City  he 
earned  $4  a  day? 

Yes,  that  was  the  early  1930s.  He  worked 
at  the  Silver  Hill  mine  [until]  he  got  so  sick 
that  he  couldn’t  work  anymore.  He  quit 
working  10  September  1938,  and  he  died  17 
September  1938.  He  was  a  wonderful  man, 
and  he  worked  very  hard.  I  was  very  close  to 
my  father. 

Did  the  miners  in  Virginia  City  participate  in 
any  social  events  in  the  community? 

Oh,  yes.  There  were  weekly  dances,  and 
different  organizations  would  give  dances  and 
entertainments.  There  would  be  celebrations, 
like  the  Fourth  of  July  celebrations  and  Labor 
Day,  and  everyone  participated. 

And  the  miners  all  came  out  for  the  big 
celebrations? 


Yes.  They  got  all  dressed  up  and  had  a 
good  time,  [laughter] 

Do  you  remember  any  of  these  celebrations 
from  when  you  were  a  small  child? 

Yes,  I  remember  them.  It  was  an 
opportunity  to  go  uptown.  We  were  not 
allowed  to  go  uptown  and  to  walk  around  the 
streets  like  the  children  nowadays.  We  were 
kept  at  home,  in  our  yard,  where  everybody 
knew  where  we  were  because  there  were  mines 
and  shafts  around  the  hills,  and  our  parents 
were  always  afraid  we’d  fall  in  something 
and  never  be  found  again,  [laughter]  But  I 
remember  the  celebrations.  The  whole  family 
went,  and  we  wore  our  best  clothes  and  had  a 
lot  of  fun.  [laughter] 

Do  you  remember  the  kinds  of  events  at  these 
celebrations? 

Well,  of  course,  there  were  always  drilling 
contests  and  a  parade  and  usually  a  dance  at 
night.  The  celebrations  went  on  for  2  or  3  days. 
The  town  would  be  all  decorated  with  flags, 
and  we  could  have  ice  cream  or  whatever  we 
wanted  along  the  streets.  When  there  was  a 
celebration  in  Virginia  City  it  was  a  festive  time. 

Did  your  father  have  a  religious  preference? 

My  father  was  a  Lutheran.  He  attended 
school  in  Copenhagen,  and  they  taught  the 
Bible  in  the  schools  there.  He  knew  more  about 
the  Bible  than  anyone  I  ever  knew.  They  also 
taught  English  in  the  schools,  but  he  didn’t 
learn  English  in  Denmark  because  when  he 
came  to  the  United  States  he  couldn’t  speak  the 
language.  He  learned  to  read  and  speak  perfect 
English  without  any  help;  he  just  learned  on  his 
own.  He  was  [also]  very  good  at  mathematics. 


10 


Marion  Gladding 


You  mentioned  that  your  father  was  a  Lutheran. 
Where  did  he  go  to  church  here  in  Virginia 
City ? 

My  mother  was  an  Episcopalian — her 
mother  and  father  belonged  to  the  High 
Church  of  England.  There  was  no  Lutheran 
church  in  Virginia  City,  so  my  father  attended 
church  at  the  Episcopalian  church  with  my 
mother.  My  3  brothers  and  myself  were  all 
baptized  and  confirmed  in  the  Episcopalian 
church. 

St.  Paul’s  Episcopal  Church  is  located  on  E 
Street  right  below  St.  Mary’s  in  the  Mountains. 
It  is  a  very  lovely  church.  The  pipe  organ  in  the 
Episcopalian  church  was  the  first  pipe  organ 
west  of  the  Rockies  at  that  time.  And  the  wood 
from  which  the  church  was  built  was  brought 
into  Virginia  City  from  the  eastern  part  of  the 
United  States.  The  inside  of  the  church  is  still 
lovely. 

I  sang  in  the  choir  of  the  Episcopal  church 
when  I  was  a  teenager.  I  was  always  late,  and 
the  minister,  Reverend  Hersey,  told  me  that  I 
would  probably  be  late  for  my  own  wedding. 
And  I  was!  He  was  also  the  officiating  minister 
when  my  husband  and  I  were  married, 
[laughter]  He  was  a  wonderful  man. 

Did  the  church  sponsor  any  clubs  or 
organizations ? 

They  had  an  organization  for  young 
girls,  which  I  belonged  to,  the  Girls  Friendly 
Association.  We  had  parties  once  every  2 
weeks,  and  could  invite  our  boyfriends.  There 
was  a  big  recreation  hall  in  the  bottom  of 
the  church — it’s  an  art  gallery  now.  This  was 
where  we  had  our  parties.  There  was  always 
refreshments  and  dancing.  It  was  very  nice.  I 
can  lookback  and  think  about  those  parties, 
and  they  were  very  nice.  Much  different  from 
the  [parties]  boys  and  girls  have  nowadays. 


Could  you  tell  us  where  [your]  father  had  his 
hair  cut ? 

My  father  had  his  hair  cut  in  Fred 
Strauss’s  barber  shop.  As  I  remember  it,  it 
was  across  the  street  from  where  the  Sawdust 
Corner  is  now.  I  think  Mr.  Strauss  had  2  or 
3  different  locations,  but  that’s  the  one  that 
I  remember. 

And  that  was  on  C  Street ? 

On  C  Street,  yes. 

Did  the  miners  ever  spend  a  great  deal  of  time 
at  any  particular  establishment  in  town ? 

Well,  of  course  there  was  the  Bucket  of 
Blood,  which  is  still  there,  but  at  that  time  it 
was  the  Senate  saloon.  It  got  the  name  Bucket 
of  Blood  because  there  was  so  many  fights 
there,  and  people  got  beat  up  a  little.  I  think 
Mr.  McBride  bought  the  Bucket  of  Blood 
in  the  1930s.  I  believe  he  came  here  from 
Winnemucca  to  raise  his  family.  I  knew  his 
wife;  she  was  a  real  lovely  lady.  Then  there  was 
the  Smokery,  which  is  the  Delta  now,  and  that 
has  always  been  a  very  popular  place. 

Miners  did  a  lot  of  partying,  but  they  were 
also  family  men.  Payday  was  a  big  night  on  the 
Comstock;  most  of  them  stopped  on  their  way 
home.  And,  of  course,  after  shift  they  would 
stop  and  have  their  after-shifter  before  they 
came  home.  The  after-shifter  was  a  drink. 
They  still  stop  and  have  their  after-shifter,  but 
they’re  not  miners  anymore,  [laughter] 

The  Sazarac  [was  another  place  the  men 
used  to  stop].  It  was  across  the  street  from 
the  Crystal.  I  know  very  little  about  the  old 
Sazarac.  I  know  there  was  a  thing  called  the 
Liars’  Club  connected  with  it.  Everybody 
tried  to  out-do  everybody  else  with  the  best 
he.  [laughter]  After  many,  many  years,  my 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


11 


brother  Clint,  who’s  gone,  started  a  saloon 
called  the  Sazarac  where  the  Ponderosa 
Saloon  is  now. 

About  what  time  was  this ? 

About  1945,  I  think.  He  started  that 
saloon,  and  he  was  also  the  first  one  to  start 
the  Sharon  House,  upstairs.  The  Sharon 
House  was  a  dinner  house  and  a  bar.  In  fact, 
he  named  it  the  Sharon  House.  You  see,  [in 
the  early  days]  Sharon  was  president  of  a  bank 
that  used  to  be  in  that  building. 

The  Crystal  Bar,  [another  early 
establishment]  was  originally  the  bar  in 
the  Washoe  Club.  The  Washoe  Club  was  a 
millionaires’  club,  and  I  don’t  think  all  the 
miners  got  to  go  to  the  Crystal  [in  those 
days],  [laughter]  [Today]  they  still  have  the 
original  fixtures  in  the  Crystal  Bar  that  were 
in  the  original  one — it’s  still  one  of  the  nicest 
places  in  town  to  go. 

It’s  very  nice.  Were  there  other  places  where  the 
miners  liked  to  go  after  their  shift ? 

Well,  everybody  went  to  the  [Nevada] 
Brewery.  It  was  right  at  the  head  of  Six  Mile 
Canyon.  As  I  remember  it — I  stopped  there 
with  my  parents  and  with  my  grandfather; 
children  were  allowed  inside  in  those  days — 
it  was  lovely.  They  had  plants  inside,  and 
the  whole  room  was  overgrown  with  vines 
and  plants;  it  was  so  cool,  comfortable  and 
pleasant.  The  Brewery  was  started  by  a  man 
by  the  name  of  Reick  and  his  family.  Then 
his  daughter  and  her  husband  took  it  over; 
their  name  was  Schnitzer.  I  can  remember 
they  made  their  own  beer.  People  used  to  go 
there  with  buckets  and  bring  the  beer  home, 
and  they  delivered  beer  to  other  saloons 
in  town.  They  also  had  a  beautiful  garden 
where  people  went  outside.  I’ve  never  been  to 


Germany,  but  maybe  it  was  like  the  German 
beer  gardens — the  Schnitzers  came  here  from 
Germany. 

Were  there  other  breweries  in  Virginia  City ? 

Yes,  the  Union  Brewery  up  on  C  Street, 
run  by  Gordon  Lane  now,  is  very  famous. 
Gordon  keeps  things  really  popping  in  the 
Union  Brewery,  [laughter] 

Do  you  know  who  owned  the  Union  Brewery 
before  Mr.  Lane ? 

A  man  by  the  name  of  Nello  Lazzeri — they 
called  him  Bronco. 

Did  he  found  that  brewery? 

I  don’t  know  who  founded  it. 

Were  there  many  other  places  where  the  miners 
used  to  go? 

Well,  there  was  the  Old  62  on  C  Street. 
I  don’t  know  who  started  that,  either,  but  in 
my  time  it  was  frequented  by  mostly  Italian 
people.  There  were  quite  a  few  Italians  in 
Virginia  City. 

When  did  they  come  to  Virginia  City? 

I  really  don’t  know.  But  as  far  [back]  as  I 
can  remember,  I  can  remember  Italian  people. 
When  we  moved  up  from  Six  Mile  Canyon 
we  lived  in  a  small  house  down  on  north  D 
Street,  and  right  next  door  to  us  there  was 
an  Italian  family  by  the  name  of  Beano.  They 
had  2  little  girls;  one  was  my  age,  Angelina, 
and  I  can’t  remember  the  other’s  name  [for 
sure],  but  it  seems  like  it  was  Stella.  Instead  of 
giving  her  bread  and  milk,  they  used  to  soak 
bread  in  wine  and  give  it  to  her.  [laughter]  I 


12 


Marion  Gladding 


guess  that  was  one  way  of  keeping  her  quiet, 
[laughter]  I  can  remember  many  [Italian] 
people.  There  was  the  Spezias  and  of  course 
the  Giuffras,  and  I  remember  one  boy  in  my 
grade  at  school —  Roy  Venturi.  [Another]  was 
Gonz;  this  boy  lived  by  himself  at  the  foot  of 
Washington  Street. 

He  didn’t  live  with  a  family;  he  lived  by  himself ? 

Probably  in  the  beginning  [he  lived 
with  a  family].  This  happened  in  a  couple  of 
instances.  One  that  I  remember  in  particular 
was  a  young  boy  whom  my  grandfather  took 
into  his  home  because  he  was  alone;  his  name 
was  Steve  Breghenti.  His  family  wanted  to  go 
back  to  Europe,  and  Steve  didn’t  want  to  go. 
At  that  time  13-year-old  boys  worked  in  the 
mines.  They  carried  tools  to  the  miners,  and 
did  things  like  that.  Steve  was  all  by  himself 
and  had  no  place  to  stay,  [so]  my  grandfather 
took  him  into  his  home.  He  lived  with  him  for 
years.  In  fact,  he  used  to  tell  me  all  the  time 
that  my  grandfather  raised  him,  “Old  Tom 
Berry  raised  me,”  he  used  to  say.  He  never 
could  speak  English  well,  even  though  he  went 
to  school  in  Six  Mile  Canyon  with  the  rest 
of  the  children.  I  remember  Steve  Breghenti 
very  well.  He’s  another  man  that  died  with 
miner’s  consumption.  I  can’t  think  of  any 
other  Italians  right  now,  but  there  were  many 
Italian  families  here. 

Where  did  the  miners  buy  their  clothes ? 

Oh,  there  was  Chung  Kee’s,  which  was  a 
Chinese  store  on  the  corner  of  D  Street  and 
Union  Street.  You  could  buy  most  anything 
in  there — clothes  and  groceries.. .not  a  lot  of 
groceries,  but  he  had  certain  things.  He  gave 
you  Chinese  candy  and  nuts  at  Christmas. 
My  aunt  bought  me  my  first  patent  leather 
slippers  at  Chung  Kee’s. 


Then  there  was  Ryan  &  Stenson.  They  had 
a  dry  goods  store;  they  sold  children’s  clothes, 
women’s  clothes,  men’s  clothes.  They  were 
located  right  where  the  post  office  is  now. 
And  there  was  a  lady  by  the  name  of  Mrs. 
Sheehy  who  had  a  hat  store,  and  that’s  where 
you  got  your  Easter  bonnet.  That  was  on  the 
same  block  as  the  Crystal,  in  a  building  right 
where  that  little  mall  is  now. 

So  this  was  north  of  the  Crystal  on  C  Street ? 

Yes.  And  a  little  before  my  time — but  I 
can  remember  the  lady — Theresa  Rodham 
used  to  make  hats.  Big  beautiful  ornate  hats 
with  feathers,  birds  and  what  have  you.  That 
was  up  on  C  Street  [south  of  the  Crystal  Bar]. 
And  there  was  Mrs.  Eddy.  Mrs.  Eddy  had 
everything.  If  she  wanted  to  find  anything,  she 
had  a  difficult  time  doing  it.  We  used  to  buy  our 
candy  from  Mrs.  Eddy  because  you  could  go 
in  with  a  penny  and  get  5  pieces  of  candy.  She 
was  a  cute  little  old  lady.  I  can  still  remember 
her.  When  we  went  into  the  post  office  in  1933, 
Mrs.  Eddy  was  still  operating  her  store. 

Now  I  would  like  to  talk  to  you  about  your 
mother.  You  have  already  told  me  her  name, 
but  why  don’t  you  repeat  it  and  then  go  on 
from  there. 

My  mother’s  name  was  Alice  Berry.  She 
had  no  middle  name.  She  was  born  in  Seven 
Mile  Canyon  23  June  1891.  She  was  89  years 
old  when  she  died — 5  days  after  her  birth 
date.  She  went  to  school  in  Six  Mile  Canyon 
until  she  was  through  with  the  eighth  grade, 
and  then  came  to  Virginia  City  and  went  to 
high  school.  She  graduated  in  1908.  And  then 
she  went  back  to  Six  Mile  Canyon  and  lived 
with  her  parents  because  at  that  time  my 
grandfather  was  sick  and  my  grandmother 
needed  help.  She  met  my  father  in  1909  and 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


13 


married  him  when  she  was  18  years  old;  I  was 
born  when  she  was  19. 

Was  your  mother  active  in  any  of  the  social 
clubs  in  Virginia  City ? 

Yes,  my  mother  was  a  past  matron  of  the 
Order  of  the  Eastern  Star,  Argenta  Chapter, 
and  she  also  belonged  to  the  Colfax  Rebekah 
Lodge.  Another  organization  [she  belonged 
to]  was  the  Relief  Corps;  it  was  a  patriotic 
organization. 

Where  did  the  Eastern  Star  meet? 

At  that  time  the  Eastern  Star  met  in  the 
old  Masonic  Hall,  which  has  since  been  torn 
down. 

Where  was  that? 

It  was  on  C  Street  across  from  the  old 
Union  Brewery.  It  was  a  beautiful  lodge  hall, 
carpeted  in  blue  [with]  white  furniture  and 
white  fixtures.  It  was  2  stories.  In  the  bottom 
story  there  was  a  banquet  hall  and  a  kitchen. 
In  the  second  story  there  was  the  lodge  hall 
and  the  anterooms.  I  am  also  a  past  matron 
of  Argenta  Chapter. 

When  did  the  Masonic  Hall  come  down? 

It  came  down  in  the  1940s;  it  was  torn 
down.  It  was  too  bad,  but  the  engineers  said 
that  it  was  unsafe;  some  of  the  walls  were 
cracked.  It  was  a  beautiful  hall,  and  it’s  too 
bad  to  lose  those  kinds  of  buildings. 

Where  did  the  Rebekahs  meet? 

The  Colfax  Rebekah  Lodge  is  the  second 
oldest  Rebekah  lodge  in  the  United  States.  It 
was  organized  by  Tyler  Colfax.  At  that  time 


there  was  3  Odd  Fellows  halls  in  Virginia  City; 
one  was  in  the  National  Guard  Hall — there 
were  lodge  rooms  above  the  hall.  The  present 
one  is  right  above  where  Grandma’s  Fudge 
candy  shop  is  now.  That  is  the  Rebekah  and 
Odd  Fellows  Hall,  and  that’s  a  Shrine  Lodge 
now.  They  have  some  beautiful  old  banners 
with  gold  fringe  on  them  in  frames  in  that  hall. 
And  they  have  some  of  the  original  Masonic 
furniture  because  the  Masonic  Lodge  and  the 
Eastern  Stars  meet  there,  too,  now. 

Where  did  the  Relief  Corps  meet? 

Well,  there  was  a  row  of  buildings  up 
above  the  National  Guard  Hall,  and  they  met 
in  one  of  those  buildings.  But  the  organization 
became  too  big,  and  then  they  moved  into  the 
Odd  Fellows  Hall.  The  Odd  Fellows  were  very 
generous  with  their  meeting  hall. 

Would  you  describe  the  location  of  the  National 
Guard  Hall? 

The  National  Guard  Hall  was  just  south  of 
the  firemen’s  museum  on  C  Street.  We  used  to 
go  to  movies  in  the  National  Guard  Hall,  and 
had  dances  in  the  National  Guard  Hall.  Also, 
upstairs  was  the  telegraph  office,  and  there 
were  offices  in  there  besides  the  lodge  hall.  I 
remember  them  tearing  it  down,  probably  in 
the  1930s. 

What  did  the  Relief  Corps  do  here  in  Virginia 
City? 

It  was  mostly  social,  as  I  remember  it. 

Was  that  also  true  of  the  Eastern  Star  and  the 
Rebekahs? 

No,  the  Eastern  Star  and  the  Rebekahs 
were  part  of  national  organizations,  and 


14 


Marion  Gladding 


they  were  both  very  active.  The  Eastern  Stars 
carried  on  the  work  that  they  were  pledged 
to  do,  and  they  were  very  helpful  around 
Virginia  City.  Some  of  it  was  charitable 
work.  They  really  took  care  of  their  own.  The 
Rebekahs  and  the  Odd  Fellows  took  care  of 
the  sick  and  did  everything  they  could  for 
members  of  their  own  organization.  They  still 
do. 

Did  your  mother  ever  participate  in  any  other 
organizations? 

Well,  she  belonged  to  the  PTA,  [but]  she 
wasn’t  too  active.  She  was  busy  at  home,  but 
she  did  belong  to  it  and  did  whatever  she 
could  to  help  children.  My  mother  was  very 
fond  of  children.  She  was  a  nice  lady. 

What  did  your  mother  do  when  she  socialized 
with  her  friends? 

Oh,  they  played  cards;  she  went  to  bridge 
parties.  But  my  mother’s  social  life  was  home 
mostly.  We  were  very  close-knit,  and  I  can’t 
remember  ever  coming  home  from  school 
when  my  mother  wasn’t  there.  Throughout 
my  school  years  she  was  always  there.  She 
was  a  wonderful  cook;  that’s  why  I  don’t 
cook  so  well — I  couldn’t  compete,  [laughter] 
She  did  many  nice  things  for  people  that  no 
one  knows  about.  There  was  a  wonderful  old 
man  who  lived  across  the  street  from  us,  Mr. 
Sullivan,  and  she  saw  that  when  he  got  sick 
he  had  things  to  eat.  She  did  many  things  like 
that  that  she  didn’t  say  anything  about. 

I  would  like  to  talk  to  you  now  about  your 
mother’s  work  around  the  house.  Could  you 
describe  some  of  it  for  me? 

What  she  liked  best  about  housework  was 
cooking.  Every  other  day  she  made  a  baking 


of  bread.. .5  or  6  loaves.  Her  house  was  always 
clean — not  always  neat  because  she  thought 
happiness  came  first.  When  we  came  home 
from  school  she  was  there.  Dinner  was  always 
ready  when  my  father  came  home  from  work. 

What  else  did  your  mother  do? 

She  didn’t  do  very  much  outside  of  the 
home,  actually.  She  was  really  a  homebody. 
Her  whole  life  was  her  family.  She  was  only 
44  years  old  when  my  father  died. 

What  did  she  do  after  your  father  passed  away? 

She  just  stayed  home  and  kept  house. 
My  oldest  brother  lived  with  her.  She  was 
perfectly  happy  and  content  just  to  be  home. 
She  had  opportunities;  in  fact,  she  could 
have  worked  for  Mary  Nicklanovich,  but  she 
just  didn’t  want  to  do  that.  She  wanted  to  be 
home,  and  that’s  what  we  let  her  do.  I  used 
to  take  her  out  on  little  trips  and  things  like 
that,  but  as  far  as  ever  getting  out  to  work  or 
socializing  in  a  big  way,  she  was  just  not  that 
kind  of  person. 

Where  did  your  mother  buy  her  groceries? 

Well,  there  was  a  man  by  the  name  of 
Halley  who  had  a  grocery  store.  That  was  right 
next  to  where  the  Visitor’s  Bureau  is  now  on 
C  Street.  She  bought  her  groceries  there  for 
years.  And  then  there  was  George  Wilson’s 
store  further  up  the  street,  and  she  bought 
her  groceries  there  for  many  years  when 
Mr.  Halley  closed  his  shop.  And  after  Neil 
Gallagher  took  over  George  Wilson’s  grocery 
store —  his  wife  was  Mr.  Wilson’s  niece — she 
bought  her  groceries  there  until  they  closed 
up.  Then  Clint  Salmon  had  a  grocery  store, 
and  that’s  where  she  bought  her  groceries  as 
long  as  she  needed  to. 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


15 


Where  was  that  located? 

That  was  right  next  to  the  post  office  on 
C  Street. 

Your  busy  street  is  C  Street. 

Yes.  That’s  the  main  street  in  more  ways 
than  one! 

Would  you  tell  us  some  more  about  your 
mother? 

Well,  after  my  2  children,  Edward  and 
Fred,  were  born,  I  wanted  to  work,  so  she 
took  care  of  them  from  the  time  they  were 
babies  until  they  were  old  enough  to  go  to 
school.  She  must  have  been  a  good  influence 
on  them  because  they  have  both  turned  out 
well,  and  my  husband  and  I  are  very  proud  of 
them.  Mother  did  everything  in  those  days. 
She  took  care  of  her  own  house  and  did  the 
cooking  and  had  us  all  home  for  dinners 
[on]  Christmas  and  any  holiday  we  wanted 
to  come  home  for.  [She  did  this]  until  she 
was  84  years  old  when  she  got  sick,  and  then 
she  couldn’t  do  any  more  after  that.  She  was 
almost  blind  when  she  died. 

I  would  like  to  discuss  your  own  biography  now. 
I  know  you  lived  with  your  parents  in  several 
homes  here  in  Virginia  City.  Could  you  tell  me 
about  them? 

[The  first]  was  on  Washington  Street,  east 
of  C  Street,  which  is  the  main  street.  I  was 
born  there.  Then  my  parents  moved  out  to 
the  north  end  of  town,  and  the  little  house  is 
still  down  there  on  north  D  Street.  Then  we 
moved  again,  further  north,  and  when  I  was 
older  we  moved  to  the  south  end  of  town. 
We  lived  in  the  north  end  of  town  until  I 
was  through  with  high  school,  and  then  we 


moved  into  a  big  house  in  the  south  end  of 
town  right  across  from  the  old  Fourth  Ward 
School.  We  lived  there  for  4  or  5  years.  My 
mother  finally  bought  an  old  house  up  here 
on  north  A  street.  That’s  the  last  house  that 
she  lived  in,  too.  It  was  her  home  when  she 
died.  My  oldest  brother  lives  there  now.  He 
never  married — my  mother  made  too  good 
a  home,  I  guess. 

Where  did  you  go  to  school? 

I  started  school  in  the  First  Ward  School 
which  was  on  the  north  end  of  Virginia 
City  right  where  the  service  station  is.  As  I 
picture  it,  it  was  a  big  3  or  4-story  building. 
I  went  to  the  first  2  grades  there.  My  first 
teacher’s  name  was  Katie  Quirk,  and  I  loved 
her.  I  thought  she  was  great  because  she 
smelled  so  nicely,  [laughter]  Then  there 
was  another  teacher,  named  Mrs.  Neal;  she 
was  the  third  and  fourth  grade  teacher.  But 
before  I  was  through  with  the  third  grade, 
they  discontinued  the  third  and  fourth  grade 
in  the  First  Ward,  and  we  all  went  up  to  the 
Fourth  Ward  School.  My  teacher  there  was 
Sadie  Smith.  My  boys  had  Sadie  Smith  for 
a  teacher  also;  she  was  going  that  long.  The 
other  teachers  I  had  were  Fouise  Sullivan 
and  Evelyn  Stock.  [These  were]  all  grammar 
school  teachers.  Mrs.  Parr  and  Mrs.  Williams 
were  [there,  too,]  but  I  never  had  either  one 
of  them. 

In  high  school  I  had  Mr.  Williams;  he 
was  the  principal.  I  was  2  grades  ahead  of  my 
husband,  not  because  I’m  older,  but  I  went 
through  high  school  in  3  years.  Fet’s  see,  Don 
Richards  was  my  very  favorite  teacher.  Tillie 
Evanson  was  there,  and  there  was  another 
by  the  name  of  Mickey  Miller.  She  was  from 
northern  California.  The  coach  was  John  F. 
Metcalf,  but  I  didn’t  have  athletics.  I  enjoyed 
high  school  very  much. 


16 


Marion  Gladding 


Then  I  went  to  University  of  Nevada  to 
normal  school,  which  they  don’t  have  any 
more.  I  went  for  2  years  to  normal  school, 
and  then  I  taught  school  in  a  little  rural 
school  close  to  Fallon.  It  was  called  the  Beach 
District.  That  is  just  about  where  the  naval 
base  is  now.  I  had  32  pupils  and  all  8  grades. 
There  was  no  time  for  individual  attention.  I 
was  the  only  teacher,  but  it  was  fun.  I  lived 
on  the  Austin  ranch  in  the  Fallon  area, 
and  then  I  lived  with  some  other  people 
by  the  name  of  Norcutt.  I  enjoyed  teaching 
school.  We  did  quite  well.  I  had  to  have 
the  older  children  help  with  the  younger 
children,  especially  at  recess  time.  I  was 
very  popular  because  I  was  the  only  teacher 
for  miles,  [laughter]  We  had  hay  rides,  and 
the  people  in  the  district  had  parties  at  the 
school.  [There  was]  wonderful  food:  fried 
chicken,  whipped  cream  cakes  and  all  kinds 
of  wonderful  things  to  eat. 

Who  came  to  these  parties ? 

Ranchers,  the  parents  of  the  children  and 
the  young  people  in  the  district.  It  was  fun. 
It  was  really  a  good  experience,  and  I  loved 
teaching  school.  This  school  was  right  next 
to  a  pasture.  I  remember  that,  [laughter] 
The  cows  in  the  pasture,  especially  the  bull, 
used  to  scare  me  to  death.  The  children  were 
absolutely  forbidden  to  go  in  the  pasture, 
but  they  would  when  they  weren’t  in  class. 
One  boy  broke  his  arm  one  day  riding  a  calf. 
When  you  have  32  children,  you  have  to  have 
class  during  recess,  and  then  there  was  no 
supervision.  So,  I  couldn’t  watch  them  every 
minute. 

My  idea  was  to  teach  for  3  years,  and  then 
go  back  to  college  and  finish  my  degree,  which 
I  never  did.  My  father  got  sick,  and  I  came 
home.  I  lived  at  home  and  went  to  work  in 
the  Virginia  City  post  office. 


About  what  time  was  that? 

That  was  1933;  my  husband  and  I  worked 
there  together.  I  worked  in  the,  post  office 
until  1969 — almost  37  years. 

When  did  you  marry  Mr.  Gladding? 

I  married  Mr.  Gladding  when  he  came 
home  on  leave  during  World  War  II — 3 
January  1943.  He  had  36  hours  leave,  and 
he  spent  15  hours  of  it  getting  here  because 
it  was  the  stormiest  night  of  the  whole  year, 
[laughter]  He  was  in  the  army  for  31/2  years 
and  spent  most  of  that  time  in  Alaska.  That’s 
why  he  doesn’t  like  cold  weather. 

Before  we  pursue  your  biography  after  you 
went  to  work  at  the  post  office  in  1933, 1  was 
wondering  if  you  could  describe  what  Fallon 
was  like  in  the  early  1930s? 

Yes.  At  that  time  Fallon  was  clearly  a 
farming  community.  That  was  before  the  naval 
installation  was  out  there.  Fallon  itself  was 
cowboys  and  ranchers,  and  the  children  wore 
cowboy  hats  and  boots.  It  was  fun  because  I 
was  from  a  mining  community,  and  I  had  never 
had  any  experience  with  farming.  I  lived  right 
on  the  ranches.  What  especially  got  me  was  the 
abundance  of  food,  and  the  amount  of  food 
that  the  cowboys  and  the  men  on  the  ranches 
could  eat.  They  worked  all  day  and  were 
hungry  by  the  time  they  came  in.  [laughter] 

There  were  many  young  people,  and  we 
would  go  into  town.  We  went  to  the  movie 
theater,  and  there  were  1  or  2  restaurants — not 
many — [so]  we  would  stop  and  have  dinner 
or  a  sandwich.  I  remember  I.  H.  Kent’s  store; 
Mr.  Kent  used  to  cash  my  check  for  me.  I 
remember  the  postmaster  very  well  because 
afterwards  I  learned  to  know  him  better 
through  the  post  office  in  Virginia  City.  It 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


17 


was  just  a  fun  little  community,  very  close- 
knit;  everyone  knew  everyone  else.  When  I 
go  through  Fallon  now  and  see  the  changes, 
and  the  big  naval  base,  it’s  difficult  to  believe 
that  I  ever  taught  school  down  in  that  sand 
and  sagebrush. 

The  ranches  in  the  district  where  I  taught 
were  operated  mostly  by  transient  people. 
They  would  come  in  and  take  them  for  maybe 
2  or  3  years,  and  then  leave  again.  The  Austins 
and  the  Norcutts,  the  people  I  lived  with, 
owned  their  ranches,  but  there  were  many 
around  that  didn’t.  They  would  just  lease  them 
for  a  short  time  and  then  move  on.  It  was  a 
different  life  for  me. 

When  you  came  hack  to  Virginia  City  and 
began  working  at  the  post  office  in  1933,  what 
was  going  on? 

It  was  still  a  mining  town  in  the  1930s,  and 
the  mines  were  operating.  There  was  the  big 
Con-Chollar  mill,  and  the  Dayton  mine  was 
operating.  That  was  in  Silver  City.  The  Con- 
Virginia  was  still  operating.  At  that  time  there 
was  probably  around  1,500  men  working  on 
the  Comstock.  But  as  soon  as  World  War  II 
broke  out,  it  was  cut  right  off  because  silver 
and  gold  were  no  longer  strategic  metals,  and 
the  mines  were  closed  down.  The  men  went  to 
work  in  the  shipyards,  and  the  war  meant  a  big 
change  in  everyone’s  life.  All  the  young  men 
went  into  the  service.  The  population  dropped, 
probably  to  around  200  people,  and  it  was 
mostly  women  and  older  men  and  children. 
The  girls  would  pool  our  gas  stamps  and  take 
little  trips  to  Reno  for  dinner  or  go  to  a  movie 
or  something  like  that.  We  managed  to  get  by; 
it  was  just  a  little  lonesome,  [laughter] 

Now,  when  Mr.  Gladding— the  postmaster — 
went  away  to  war,  who  ran  the  post  office  in 
his  absence? 


I  was  appointed  acting  postmaster  in  his 
absence.  They  gave  the  postmasters  leave,  and 
their  time  in  the  military  still  counted  toward 
their  retirement.  But,  I  was  acting  postmaster 
for  about  3 Vi,  almost  4  years. 

How  old  were  you  at  this  time? 

I  was  29,  and  I  had  different  people  come 
to  help  me  work.  Mrs.  Gladding,  who  was  the 
postmaster’s  mother,  was  the  one  that  helped 
me  more  than  anyone  else.  She  worked  with 
me  in  the  post  office,  and  we  became  very 
close  and  good  friends.  She  was  glad  when  I 
married  her  son.  [laughter] 

Two  of  my  brothers,  Fred  and  Earl,  were 
also  in  the  service.  Earl  was  a  ski  trooper  for 
a  time,  which  was  different.  He  was  sent  up 
into  Alaska,  and  he  went  to  the  Aleutians 
because  Japan  had  occupied  the  Aleutians 
at  that  time.  He  went  up  there  and  they 
expected  a  big  campaign,  but  the  Japanese 
had  left,  and  he  was  sent  back  to  the  United 
States.  Then  he  went  into  the  infantry,  and 
he  was  sent  to  the  European  theater.  Fred, 
my  oldest  brother,  went  into  Europe  on 
D  day.  He  was  in  a  tank  destroyer  unit, 
and  Earl  was  in  the  infantry.  Both  of  them 
went  through  the  whole  European  theater 
of  war.  They  wrote  letters  home,  but  there 
was  never  anything  in  them  that  told  us  of 
what  was  going  on.  Except  when  it  was  over, 
my  youngest  brother,  Earl,  wrote  a  letter 
and  said,  “There  is  nothing  to  worry  about 
anymore.  It’s  finished.”  That  was  the  first 
news  we  got  that  the  war  was  going  to  come 
to  an  end.  They  both  saw  a  lot  of  action,  and 
my  husband  was  up  in  the  cold  in  Alaska, 
[laughter] 

After  the  war  Mr.  Gladding  came  back  and 
assumed  his  position  as  postmaster.  Did  you 
still  work  at  the  post  office? 


18 


Marion  Gladding 


Yes. 

Didn’t  you  do  something  else  about  that  time, 
too? 

Yes.  I  have  always  been  interested  in 
writing,  and  I  became  the  editor  of  the 
Virginia  City  News.  That  was  before  Lucius 
Beebe’s  time.  The  Virginia  City  News  was 
owned  by  a  man  by  the  name  of  Pete  Burke, 
and  I  used  to  line  up  articles  [for  the  paper]. 
At  that  time  there  was  a  red-light  district  in 
Virginia  City,  and  it  could  be  violent.  Once 
a  man  was  found  hanging  in  the  basement 
of  a  house  that  was  not  in  the  red-light 
district,  but  the  man  was  associated  with  it. 
Apparently  he  had  hanged  himself;  he  hadn’t 
been  murdered.  But  when  they  investigated 
the  house  they  found  a  woman’s  body  buried 
in  the  basement.  It  was  afterwards  proven  that 
she  had  died  of  natural  causes.  It  was  quite  a 
story  at  the  time,  and  the  police  department, 
knowing  me,  gave  me  the  scoop.  I  called  it 
in  to  the  Reno  papers,  and  the  San  Francisco 
papers  called  me.  It  was  the  highlight  of  my 
writing  career.  If  I  had  [realized],  I  could 
have  sold  the  story  for  money,  but  I  didn’t  get 
anything  but  my  salary. 

Anyway,  the  outcome  of  the  whole  thing 
was  that  they  closed  the  red-light  district  in 
Virginia  City  forever.  It  was  quite  a  thing 
because  these  people  mingled  in  Virginia 
City,  and  some  of  them  were  beautiful  young 
girls.  Having  worked  in  the  post  office,  I  knew 
them. 

You  mentioned  that  you  worked  for  the 
Virginia  City  News.  Had  that  paper  always 
run  continuously  from  the  early  days,  or  had 
it  been  closed  down? 

It  was  closed  down  for  a  long  time.  [Then] 
Pete  Burke  bought  it,  and  after  he  owned  it, 


there  were  2  or  3  other  owners.  Finally  it 
was  sold  to  Lucius  Beebe,  who  owned  [both] 
the  Territorial  Enterprise  and  the  Virginia 
City  News.  Mrs.  Schafer  owns  it  now.  The 
Territorial  Enterprise  was  the  first  newspaper 
in  Nevada.  It  was  first  issued  in  Genoa.  They 
have  a  good  file  of  the  Territorial  Enterprise 
at  the  courthouse.  It  starts  with  the  first  issue 
after  the  fire  of  1875.  This  issue  they  printed  in 
Gold  Hill  on  the  Gold  Hill  News  press  because 
the  Territorial  Enterprise  building  had  burned 
down. 

In  the  1940s,  then,  Virginia  City  had  the  war 
and  this  rather  exciting  event  that  you  told  us 
about.  What  else  was  going  on  in  Virginia  City 
at  that  time? 

Virginia  City  was  becoming  a  tourist 
attraction.  People  were  hearing  about  Virginia 
City’s  historical  background,  its  glamorous 
past,  and  they  were  coming  to  see  all  the 
things  that  were  left.  It’s  a  good  thing  that  this 
[happened]  at  that  point  or  there  wouldn’t 
have  been  anything  left.  People  didn’t  realize 
what  they  had,  and  buildings  were  being  torn 
down.  But  after  that  point,  everyone  became 
conscious  of  the  historical  value  of  all  the 
buildings  and  the  events  that  happened  in 
Virginia  City. 

In  the  1950s  what  was  going  on  in  Virginia 
City? 

Well,  it  was  becoming  more  and  more  of 
a  tourist  town.  Lucius  Beebe  had  acquired 
the  Virginia  City  News  and  the  Territorial 
Enterprise,  and  he  gave  Virginia  City  publicity 
in  his  paper.  It  was  going  to  every  state  in 
the  Union  and  even  to  foreign  countries. 
People  were  beginning  to  see  that  they  could 
make  money  on  the  tourists,  and  they  were 
doing  things  to  attract  them — which  is  too 


A  Contribution  to  a  Survey  of  Life  and  Structures  on  the  Comstock 


19 


bad,  maybe,  because  it  has  become  very 
commercial. 

We  were  still  in  the  post  office.  We 
had  our  commemorative  stamp  in  1959, 
commemorating  the  discovery  of  silver  in 
1859,  which  was  a  really  big  event.  Then 
1964  was  the  Nevada  commemorative  stamp. 
Nevada  was  100  years  old.  Vice-president 
Nixon  visited  Virginia  City  during  the 
commemorative  stamp  celebration  in  1959. 
My  husband  has  the  first  sheet  of  stamps  off 
of  the  press,  and  it’s  autographed  by  Nixon 
as  vice-president  along  with  the  rest  of  the 
Washington,  D.C.,  people  that  visited.  At  that 
time  there  were  a  lot  of  them.  It  was  nice,  and 
it  was  interesting.  It  was  really  a  wonderful 
thing  for  the  postmaster,  but  he’s  kind  of  a 
person  that  wouldn’t  make  too  much  of  it. 
I  have  a  picture  of  my  husband  and  Nixon 
together. 

In  the  1950s  artists  started  coming  to  Virginia 
City.  Could  you  name  some  of  them? 

Well,  there  was  Lou  Siegriest,  Lou  Hughes 
and  Beck  Young.  There  were  other  very  good 
ones,  but  I  just  can’t  remember  their  names — I 
thought  I’d  never  forget!  Betty  Larson  is  very 
good;  I  admire  her  work  very  much.  Dick 
Walton  still  lives  in  Virginia  City.  There  are 
still  some  artists  in  the  old  hospital;  that’s 
where  they  lived  for  a  long  time.  Annabelle 
Shelly  lives  here,  too — she’s  quite  good — and 
Mavis  Hess  visits  often. 

Well,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  very  much  for 
spending  so  much  time  with  me,  and  for  giving 
me  a  wonderful  interview.  Thank  you  so  much. 

It’s  been  a  real  pleasure,  and  it’s  been  very 
nice  to  meet  you  again. 


Photographs 


The  remains  of  Butters  mill  which  was  one  of  the 
larger  mills  in  Six  Mile  Canyon. 


22 


Marion  Gladding 


Mrs.  Gladding’s  brother,  Clint  Andreasen,  established  the 
Sharon  House  and  named  the  restaurant  for  William  Sharon. 


“St.  Paul’s  Episcopal  Church  is  located  on  E  Street 
right  below  St.  Mary’s  in  the  Mountains.” 


Photographs 


23 


“The  Odd  Fellows  were  very  generous  with  their  meeting  hall” 
and  allowed  other  organizations  to  use  the  building. 


Photographs  by  N.J.  Broughton 


Original  Index: 
For  Reference  Only 


In  order  to  standardize  the  design  of  all  UNOHP  transcripts  for  the  online  database,  they  have 
been  reformatted,  a  process  that  was  completed  in  early  2012.  This  document  may  therefore  differ 
in  appearance  and  pagination  from  earlier  printed  versions.  Rather  than  compile  entirely  new 
indexes  for  each  volume,  the  UNOHP  has  made  each  transcript  fully  searchable  electronically.  If 
a  previous  version  of  this  volume  existed,  its  original  index  has  been  appended  to  this  document 
for  reference  only.  A  link  to  the  entire  catalog  can  be  found  online  at  http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 


26 


Marion  Gladding 


A 


M 


Andreasen,  Alice  Berry,  1, 
9-10,  19,  25-26,  28-31 
Andreasen,  Frederik,  1,  9- 
15,  17-20 

Andreasen  family  (Comstock) , 
1,  10-11,  36 
Arts,  the,  39 


B 


Martinsen,  Johnny,  13-14 
Mills  and  milling,  5;  Butters 
mill,  4;  Fisher  mill,  5; 
Flowery  mill,  6-7;  Pfiefer 
mill,  5 

Miners,  life  of,  15-18,  21 

Miners'  Union,  17 

Mines  and  mining,  11-14,  35; 

Berry  mine,  6-7 
Mines  and  mining:  accidents, 
11-14 


Fallon,  Nevada,  34-35 
Festivals/celebrations,  18- 
19,  39 

G 

Gladding,  Tex,  33 

I 

Italians  (Comstock) ,  23-24 


S 

Slavonians  (Comstock) ,  15- 
16 

Sport  &  leisure,  8-9 

Structures/places:  Bucket 
of  Blood,  21;  Butters 
mansion,  4;  Carney  saloon, 
4;  Chung  Kee's,  24-25; 
Crystal  Bar,  22;  Fanny 
O'Mare  saloon,  3-4;  First 
Ward  School,  31;  Flowery 
district,  2;  Fred  Strauss's 


Original  Index:  For  Reference  Only 


27 


barber  shop,  20;  grocery 
stores,  30;  Jumbo,  10; 
Jumbo  Grade,  10;  Kendall 
mansion,  5;  Masonic  Hall, 
26-27;  Mrs.  Eddy's  store, 
25;  National  Guard  Hall, 
27;  Nevada  Brewery,  22; 
Odd  Fellows  Hall,  27;  Old 
'62  bar,  23;  Rodham  mil¬ 
linery  store,  25;  Rowe's 
orchard,  5;  Ryan  &  Sten- 
son,  25;  St.  Mary's  in 
the  Mountains,  22;  St. 
Paul's  Episcopal  Church, 


W 


World  War  II,  35-36 


