An Interview with 
Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


A Contribution to a Survey of Life in Carson Valley, 
From First Settlement Through the 1950s 

Interviewee: Marvin Dressier and Ted Sallee 
Interviewed: 1984 
Published: 1984 
Interviewer: R. T. King 
UNOHP Catalog #113 


Description 

During the second and third decades of the twentieth century, the Washoe occupants of Carson Valley began deserting 
homes on property owned by ranchers who employed them to congregate on land south of Gardnerville—the so- 
called colony of Dresslerville, forty acres set aside for them by William Dressier in 1917. There were accompanying 
changes in their way of life. In return for having a place of their own, they chose to give up gardens, fruit trees and 
immediate access to the bounties of nature that were often available on the fertile, irrigated ranch lands: Dresslerville 
is on a sandy, sagebrush plateau. 

Marvin Dressier and Ted Sallee were born in 1919 and 1920, respectively, to Washoe families living on land owned 
by non-Indians. By the 1930s both families had relocated in the Dresslerville colony. In this 1984 interview Mr. 
Dressier and Mr. Sallee remember their youth in Carson Valley, concentrating on the pre-World War II days. There 
are also descriptions of their birthplaces, a particularly detailed picture being provided by Marvin Dressier of his 
family home on the site of the nineteenth-century Laverone homestead. 

As time passed, social relationships between the Washoe and non-Indians underwent changes. Mr. Dressier and 
Mr. Sallee recall incidents and personalities that are representative of a vanished era. While individual ranchers 
are spoken of with respect and admiration, both men are critical of certain social customs that once prevailed. 
Among those discussed are the Minden-Gardnerville curfew for Washoe, the denial of access to dining rooms in 
restaurants, the segregation of theaters, and the differential enforcement of local laws. The reader will also find 
brief descriptions of traditional Washoe gathering places in the valley, complete, in some cases, with their Washoe 
names. This interview is a significant addition to a growing body of information from the Washoe people about 
their life in Carson Valley since white contact. 



An Interview with 
Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 




An Interview with 
Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee: 

A Contribution to a Survey of Life in Carson Valley, 
From First Settlement Through the 1950s 


Funded with a matching grant from the 
Department of Interior, National Park Service and the 
Nevada Division of Historic Preservation and Archeology 


An Oral History Conducted by R.T. King 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1984 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1984. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: R.T. King 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Original Preface xi 

Introduction xiii 

A Note on Orthography 

An Interview with Marvin Dressier and Ted Sallee 1 

Notes 23 

Photographs 25 

Original Index: For Reference Only 27 




Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Original Preface 


The University of Nevada Oral History 
Program (OHP) engages in systematic 
interviewing of persons who can provide 
firsthand descriptions of events, people and 
places that give history its substance. The 
products of this research are the tapes of the 
interviews and their transcriptions. 

In themselves, oral history interviews 
are not history. However, they often contain 
valuable primary source material, as useful in 
the process of historiographical synthesization 
as the written sources to which historians have 
customarily turned. Verifying the accuracy of 
all of the statements made in the course of an 
interview would require more time and money 
than the OHP s operating budget permits. The 
program can vouch that the statements were 
made, but it cannot attest that they are free 
of error. Accordingly, oral histories should 
be read with the same prudence that the 
reader exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries and other 
sources of historical information. 

It is the policy of the OHP to produce 
transcripts that are as close to verbatim 


as possible, but some alteration of the 
text is generally both unavoidable and 
desirable. When human speech is captured 
in print the result can be a morass of tangled 
syntax, false starts and incomplete sentences, 
sometimes verging on incoherency. The type 
font contains no symbols for the physical 
gestures and the diverse vocal modulations 
that are integral parts of communication 
through speech. Experience shows that 
totally verbatim transcripts are often totally 
unreadable and therefore a total waste of 
the resources expended in their production. 
While keeping alterations to a minimum the 
OHP will, in preparing a text: 

a. generally delete false starts, redundancies 
and the uhs, ahs and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; 

b. occasionally compress language that 
would be confusing to the reader in unaltered 
form; 

c. rarely shift a portion of a transcript to 
place it in its proper context; and 

d. enclose in [brackets] explanatory 
information or words that were not uttered 



Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


xii 


but have been added to render the text 
intelligible. 

There will be readers who prefer to take 
their oral history straight, without even 
the minimal editing that occurred in the 
production of this text; they are directed to 
the tape recording. 

Copies of all or part of this work and the 
tape recording from which it is derived are 
available from: 

The University of Nevada 
Oral History Program 
Mailstop 0324 

University of Nevada, Reno 89557 
(775) 784-6932 



Introduction 


During the second and third decades of 
the twentieth century, the Washo occupants 
of Carson Valley began deserting homes 
on property owned by ranchers who 
employed them to congregate on land south 
of Gardnerville—the so-called colony of 
Dresslerville, 40 acres set aside for them 
by William Dressier in 1917. There were 
accompanying changes in their way of life. 
In return for having a place of their own, 
many chose to give up gardens, fruit trees 
and immediate access to the bounties of 
nature that were often available on the fertile, 
irrigated ranch lands: Dresslerville is on a 
sandy, sagebrush plateau. 

Marvin Dressier and Ted Sallee were born 
in 1919 and 1920, respectively, to Washo 
families living on land owned by non-Indians. 
By the 1930s both families had relocated in 
the Dresslerville colony. In this 1984 interview 
Mr. Dressier and Mr. Sallee remember their 
youth in Carson Valley, concentrating on 
the pre-World War II days. There are also 
descriptions of their birthplaces, a particularly 
detailed picture being provided by Marvin 


Dressier of his family home on the site of the 
nineteenth century Laverone homestead. 

As time passed social relationships 
between the Washo and non-Indians 
underwent changes. Mr. Dressier and Mr. 
Sallee recall in these pages incidents and 
personalities that are representative of a 
vanished era. While individual ranchers are 
spoken of with respect and admiration, both 
men are critical of certain social customs 
that once prevailed. Among those discussed 
are the Minden Gardnerville curfew for 
Washo, the denial of access to dining rooms 
in restaurants, the segregation of theaters and 
the differential enforcement of local laws. 
In addition the reader will also find brief 
descriptions of traditional Washo gathering 
places in the valley, complete, in some cases, 
with their Washo names. 

Both Marvin Dressier and Ted Sallee 
displayed an active interest in the history and 
culture of their people and a willingness to 
have it recorded for the edification of future 
generations. Unfortunately, Ted Sallee passed 
away in September, 1984. The interview to 



XIV 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


which he contributed is a significant addition 
to a growing body of information from the 
Washo people about their life in Carson Valley 
since white contact. 

A Note on Orthography 

The Washo words in this text have been 
transcribed by William H. Jacobsen, Jr., 
in the phonemic system he has developed 
for this language. Professor Jacobsen is the 
acknowledged authority on Washo linguistics 
and has published a number of works on the 
subject. 

An explanation of the symbols, which 
have standard Americanist values, is on file 
at the University of Nevada Oral History 
Program. Among the more commonly used 
symbols that may be unfamiliar to non¬ 
linguists: 

The acute accent indicates a stressed 
syllable. 

s sounds like sh in ship. 

q sounds like ng in sing 

< is the symbol for the glottal stop, 
a quick catch in the throat. It is 
important to discriminate this very 
common Washo sound. 

v sounds somewhat like u in just. 


z sounds like dz in adze. 




Marvin Dressler 
1984 


Ted Sallee 
1984 














An Interview with 
Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


R. T. King: There are a number of topics that I 
want to discuss with you today, were going to be 
talking about Laverone, about how Indians got 
along with non-Indians here in Gardnerville, 
about various legends—a lot of things like that. 
But before we get started on that, I need to get 
a little biographical information from you. 

Ted Sallee: I was born right here in Douglas 
County in or about Minden, somewheres 
there about 1920; it was October 23. 

Do you know about where your home was 
located at that time? If you had to place it in 
relation to today’s buildings, where would it be? 

S: It would be down east of Minden, east of 
the railroad track. There used to be a railroad 
there at one time. East of there in the willows., 
.that’s where most of the Indians used to live. 
I mean that’s the way they lived. They lived 
wherever they worked, where old people 
worked. 


S: Yes, he worked for Heise Land and 
Livestock Company. 

And that was their land out there that you 
were born on? 

S: No, my mother stayed there, and he’d 
go back and forth. He had a Model T Lord, 
and he’d go back and forth from there to there. 
That’s the way he come to work every day. 
That’s about all I know about him. 

What was his name? 

S: Tom Sallee. 

Did he have an Indian name, Washo name? 

S: His real name, I come to think of it 
now, was Jack Nye. That’s what his name was 
when he went to school in Stewart when it 
first opened up in the 1800s. 


Did your father work back there? 


But he changed his name to Tom Sallee? 



2 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


S: Yes, some reason; I don’t know why, 
because he never explained it to me. 

Yes. Did he have a Washo name? 

S: Not that I know of. 

Marvin Dressier: Mewew. 

S: Oh, yes— Mewew. 

D: It means that...like, if you leave a kid, 
then he wants to go with you, then he cries; 
that’s what it means. 

S: Yes. 

Your mother’s name—can you tell me what 
that was? 

S: Well, I don’t know her by her name, but 
Buena Johnson. 

You don’t know her by her Washo name? 

S: Yes, that’s the same thing. 1 
Does that have a meaning to it? 

S: No, it’s just a name. 

Did you know your grandparents? Were they 
still alive when you were a youth? 

S: Yes. I never got to know my grandfather, 
but I got to know my grandmothers, both of 
them—my mother’s mother and my father’s 
mother. 

Can you recall their names? 

S: Jenny Johnson was my mother’s mother 
and Sally Vedo was my father’s mother. 


Did either of them have Washo names that you 
can remember? 

S: Yes, my father’s mother’s name was Bear, 
and my mother’s mother’s name was Mahami. 

Mahami, and the other one was...? 

S: Bear. The animal, you know. 2 

Marvin, you were telling me earlier that you 
were born out on the Settelmeyer ranch. 

D: I was born April 3, 1919. Indians 
don’t go by months. They go by fall, summer 
and winter and spring. So it must be spring 
because I was born April...on the rock field. 
They used to have people working making 
rock rows in the field, so they can pick it up. 
They get paid so much a field... you know, 
contract. So they were working there. That’s 
when I was born there, at Settelmeyer’s hay 
corral, someplace around there. 

What was your mother’s name? 

D: My mother’s name was Amelia Fred. 

Did she have a Washo name? 

D: Not that I know of. I don’t remember 
because she died when I was born. 

And your father—what was his name? 

D: Harry. 

Did you ever learn his Washo name? 

D: They called him Z,inun. I don’t know 
what that is. 

Can you remember any of your grandparents? 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


3 


D: I know my grandma was Molly 
Dressier, but I don’t know her Indian name. 
She died when I was pretty young. 

She was your Lather’s mother? 

D: Yes. My grandfather was Henry 
Dressier, and his name was Na-baya. I don’t 
know what that was either. My grandmother 
on my mother’s [side] was Kitty Dressier. And 
my grandfather, they called him Big Fred. His 
name was De’m+mz+m; means he got small 
hair under his nose! [laughter] That’s about 
all I know. 

I’m curious about why so many members of 
your family were named Dressier. 

D: Well, see, a long time ago when white 
man hired some Indians, some of these 
Indians got names that you can’t pronounce. 
Or some of them names that kind of., .like, 
the bad names that... names of all kinds of bad 
things, you know. And some of them named 
by animal or birds or different things a long 
time ago. And they used to have marks on 
their hand or on their forehead or cheek or 
chin or whatever; they were known by their 
marks. Until later on, people worked for this 
person, this white man; and if they got a bad 
name or something, then they can’t name him 
or can’t pronounce their name, then they give 
them their name. That’s what happened to 
mine, see. 

My grandfather used to work for Bill 
Dressier, and they were both boys together. 
And he started to work there on that ranch, so 
Bill called my grandfather his brother. That’s 
how come he give him his name—Dressier. 
See, that’s how come we all got that name. 

And how long did your grandfather work on 
that ranch? 


D: Oh, he worked there a long time. 
I don’t know... until I must have been 
real young, that time when he went to 
Settelmeyer. Then he worked for Settelmeyer 
all the time, year after year. See, he already 
got their name, Dressier, so Fred Settelmeyer 
didn’t give him his name. 3 But anyway, he 
worked there. That’s how come, I guess, they 
were living in Laverone at first before I was 
born. 4 Then after I was born, then they lived 
there. 

We had everything. We had a house there, 
and we had a barn there; horses, cows, garden, 
apple, peaches, plum, pear—everything. An 
orchard, you know, garden right there, potato 
field right there. And we had everything. 

We even had a big wine cellar, they called 
it. My father used to make wine or whiskey or 
whatever he knows how to make at that time. 
See, it was against the law for the Indians to 
get any liquor from the white man then, so he 
make his own. 

What would he make it out of? 

D: I don’t know; he wouldn’t let me come 
in there. He wouldn’t let me: “You just stay 
out of here.” 

He was making it in the cellar? 

D: Yes. And then he used to put that 
barrels and kegs underneath the house. There 
was a cellar like underneath the house where 
we used to live. He used to roll that keg down 
in there; sit there and drink and drink till he 
get drunk and can’t walk. He didn’t have to go 
to town to get drunk; he just stay home and 
get drunk! And that’s about all, I guess.... 

Were any of the buildings that the Laverone 
family lived in still standing when you lived 
there? 



4 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


D: Everything’s the same as it was, but it’s 
all gone now. 

So you just moved into the same buildings the 
Laverones had lived in; is that correct? You 
never knew the Laver one family? 

D: No, I didn’t know who they were. 

Did your father or grandfather ever talk about 
them? 

D: No. They never mentioned to me who 
lived there before they did. But anyway, we 
had everything: we had the place there where 
we got a spring. You know, it was drinking 
water. Of course, you can’t drink water when 
it’s coming down off of the river or down along 
the irrigating ditch, because it’d be all no good; 
it’d be red with cow manure and all that stuff, 
you know, that comes in there. Then we used 
to drink that spring water all the time. And we 
got that pounding rock there that they used 
that to pitch acorn in. 

To prepare the acorn, you had to go to 
California to get the acorn. And then you 
cracked them and peeled them and pounded 
in that thing with a rock. You pound then till 
they turn to powder, and then you cook it for 
about a couple of hours. And then when it’s 
still boiling, you put them in the cold water, 
and then you turn like biscuit...little ones, you 
know? That’s called acorn biscuit. Sometimes 
they cook it till they just boil soup. They call 
that acorn soup; they called it dayasmi. And 
the other one., .that acorn biscuit is megedi. 
dit. 

Your grandmother would make those? 

D: Oh, yes. It was my grandmother and 
my aunt. I had 3 aunts, and they know how. 


They were all living at the same place at 
Laverone? 

D: They were all living in the same place, 

yes. 

Would they use that big pounding rock every 
day? 

D: No, not every day; just when we need 
to eat it. When they want to eat acorn, then 
they go pitch it. 

And they do the same thing with the 
pine nut, too, but they use a rolling or a flat 
rock like that. You roll a stone in it to make 
the pine nut soup. You had to cook it first, 
like any other thing, and then peel it—like I 
said the acorn, the same thing. When it turn 
white, then you’ll grind it till it turn powder. 
And then you don’t have to cook that one; 
you just stir it up, you know. Of course, it’s 
already cooked. You stir it up till it turn soup. 
You drink pine nut soup or either you can eat 
it just like that, you know...not grind up. 

How long did you live there at Laverone? 

D: As far as I can remember, I went away 
from there when I was maybe 12; I think I 
went to Stewart. 

Did your grandparents stay there? 

D: Yes, they stayed there while I went 
to school in Stewart. I didn’t go to school at 
first; I went to their Indian hospital they had 
down there. See, like any other kids, why, I 
climb up a tree; and there was an oriole nest 
hanging there, and I was reaching for it, and 
that cottonwood tree broke. And I came down 
in 1929; I guess I broke my arm. And then 
1930 I went to school in Stewart. And when I 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


5 


came out in the spring when the school is out, 
I find out the people had been moved from 
Laverone to here. 

To Dresslerville? 

D: Dresslerville, yes, in 1930. 

And then no Washos ever lived at Laverone 
again after that? 

D: No, nobody lived there no more after 
that. 

Did your grandparents have electricity there? 

D: No electricity; just lantern, which they 
used for light; sometime candle. 

Did they ever tell you any stories about the 
people who had occupied that land before you 
were born? 

D: They never did talk about it. Nothing. 
See, that land, that Laverone, belonged to 
Settelmeyer, not Dresslers. That land used 
to belong to Settelmeyer. Now, Settelmeyer 
sold that. So, we never tried to move back; 
nobody’s ever trying to move back. It’s been 
the same as we left it. 

Did your family have any tule huts, tule 
structures, there? 

D: We had one right between the house 
and spring just over the hill a bit; we used to 
have one there. We use it either summer or 
winter. Either way it was nice and warm. It had 
this willows standing up like tepee, but they 
have a screen put around on the inside, and 
then they lay these tules on top. I think the 
butt end sticking up; I think it was like that, 


so that when it rains or something, it don’t go 
down. See, it just stays on top and rolls off the 
side. 

Used to be nice and warm because we had 
the fire in the middle of the hut—cut a hole 
on top where the smoke goes out. You’d sleep 
in there, bed in there and all the way around. 
There’s a fire in the middle, and then they got 
a bed around the edge of the wall. 

How many people would sleep in there at one 
time? 

D: You could have about 6 or 7 people 
in there. You know, lay in the beds like that, 
foot toward the fire, or else you’re going to lay 
sideways all the way around. 

When you were living in the tule hut, what 
would you be using the other structures for? 
You said that you had a house and a barn on 
that land, as well. 

D: Well, we used that house to cook 
and eat, you know, or some people stayed 
there, too. Yes, they were living in there, too. 
Probably my aunts used to live in it while the 
old folks lived in the hut., .nice, warm. And 
then my dad, I guess he used to live in there 
in that house. Yes, he don’t go down to that 
wickiup stuff, you know. 

Were there any other structures on the land? 

D: Just that cellar along the orchard 
there. My dad used to make whiskey, wine 
or whatever. Used to haul some potatoes in 
there just., .that’s what he made—wheat and 
stuff. And he won’t let me go in there in the 
cellar. 

What did he have in the garden? 



6 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


D: Oh, we had everything—corn, carrots, 
onions, beans and different other things; 
potato field across from that orchard there on 
flat. We had everything. And then they used 
to gather them up, and my dad used to put 
them in a cellar. Whenever they want to eat 
something, they go in there and get it. We had 
apples and peaches, plums and pear—stuff in 
there. 

That orchard was left by the Laverones? Is it 
still there? 

D: Yes. It’s all dried up now. 

Ted, can you remember anything about the 
place where you grew up, where you were a boy? 

S: Not as much as he did, no. I didn’t pay 
too much attention to it. 

How long did you live out to the east ofMinden? 
flow old were you before you left that area? 

S: Well, I must have been anywhere about 
5 years old. See, my old man got to be a federal 
policeman in Reno. 

An Indian policeman? 

S: Yes, and they lived there. 

What were his responsibilities? What did he 
have to do? 

S: Well, he was a police patrolman. Of 
course, in them days they had more authority 
than these guys have here now. Can arrest a 
white man or nigger or whatever. Excuse me 
for saying nigger, but I mean colored, [laughs] 
And I went to school in Reno for a while, on 
or about 6 years old, maybe. Been there about 


a year, I suppose. Then we moved back to 
Woodfords; that’s where I spent the biggest 
part of my time. 

After you moved back to Woodfords, what was 
your father doing? 

S: He went to work for Heise Land and 
Livestock. Been there over 50 years—so he 
used to tell me. He took care of Diamond 
Valley most of the time after that. 

When did you move back into Carson Valley? 
You and Marvin were pretty good friends, 
weren’t you? 

S: We used to walk quite a ways just to 
play, you know. 

You would walk from Diamond Valley down 
to Laverone? 

S: Yes, I would say from up the river. 
He’d go all the way up the river, stay up there 
overnight sometime and come back again. 
Usually, we walked together part way, and 
then he’d go the rest of the way and I’d go 
back. 

Were there any other Indian families living 
nearby? 

S: Why, there were all kinds of Indians 
around there. There was a guy in there in that 
center a while ago that used to play around 
with us. [The center to which Mr. Sallee 
refers is the Dresslerville Senior Center. We 
ate lunch there before doing the interview.] 
But he’s kind of a funny guy; he don’t like to 
answer questions like we do. Must be Jewish 
because he liked that money pretty good. He 
wants to get paid for saying something, you 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


7 


know. But me.. .1 ain’t much of a Jew; I’d say 
anything. 

The 2 of you first met when? Can you remember 
when you [and Marvin] began to run around 
with each other? 

S: ...Quite a while ago. I don’t remember. 
You said you were in Reno when you were 6. 

S: Well, maybe it could even be before we 
went to school, because we don’t know what 
school was. The fact is, when I went to school 
I didn’t know how to talk English. 

Did you ever come down to the Dresslerville 
colony? That had already been established; did 
you ever come visit down here? 

S: Yes, my grandmother lived down here— 
my father’s folks. Used to come down here 
every now and then. 

I’ve been told by some other Washos that as 
soon as Dresslerville was created, a lot ofWasho 
families that had lived out on the various 
ranches throughout the Carson Valley decided 
to move on to land here at Dresslerville, because 
they would have their own property. Out 
there, of course, they were living on someone 
else’s land and could be moved at any time. 
Marvin was telling me his family moved here 
in 1930. when did yours decide to move into 
Dresslerville, or did they ever? 

S: I don’t know. They were already here 
when I started to remember them. See, 
they were living quite a ways down there, 
somewhere about where that road goes down 
the hill to that golf course—somewheres in 
the flat there; somewheres in the sagebrush. 


When you 2 were boys — let’s say in the 1920s 
and 1930s, when you were up to 20 years of 
age—you no doubt went into Gardnerville and 
Minden fairly frequently, didn’t you? 

S: Oh, yes. 

Why don’t you think back and tell me what you 
can remember about Gardnerville and Minden 
and about the relations between Washo Indians 
and the rest of the people who lived in those 
communities during that time, in the 1920s 
and 1930s. What would you do when you went 
to town? 

S: Well, the only thing we could do was 
we were not to stay there over 10:00 at night. 
I always thought to myself, “Those people are 
prejudiced.” We were to be out of town by 
10:00, otherwise go to jail for 30 days or so.... 
So we had to be out of town—curfew. 

Did you ever know anybody who did go to jail? 

S: Well, there was quite a few of them used 
to. A guy would get somebody to buy him 
booze and get drunk and get left over; get 
caught and go to jail for it. I can’t think quite 
who, but a lot of them used to. That’s all I can 
remember. 

What would you do when you went to town? 

S: Go to see a movie; they had a movie 
house, we would play around in the back. 
They had an old jail at the back of the town. 
That was where they gathered most of the 
time. Right around the jail there they’d 
play cards, and sometimes they’d play hand 
game—they called it hand game. There would 
be a lot of money involved in either game—a 
card game or hand game, either or both. I 



8 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


played in them. Them Basque people were 
more friendly to us than the Germans was. 
Some old Basques would go back there when 
they were playing hand game; theyd bet on 
one side or the other, you know? If theyd lose, 
theyd laugh about it. [laughs] If they win, why, 
they’re just winers, you know. Yes, we used to 
play with those Basque kids there. 

Can you remember some of the names of the 
Basque kids you played with ? 

S: Well, Raymond Borda.. .the Borda 
family—the French Hotel, you know. And 
Ted Bergevin. About all I remember. 

Of course, Basques had their own games. 

S: Yes, there used to be a handball court 
down there too. Used to watch them guys., 
.eee, them guys must have hard hands! And 
hit the darn thing! [laughter] A regular 
baseball, you know? Sound like somebody 
hitting a baseball with a baseball bat. They 
must have had pretty strong hands. 

Did any Washos play the game? 

S: Not that I know of. 

That’s that fronton that they had at the French 
Hotel...handball court there? 

S: Yes, right in the back. 

Did the Washos bet on the Basque games? 

S: No, that was left quite a bit up to 
the Basques themselves, I liked to watch 
them, but not very many of us. Used to be 
pretty friendly with Raymond Borda and 
Pete Borda, Maria Borda. She was a regular 
tomboy, the girl. 


D: Etchemendy. 

S: Yes, Joe Etchemendy and them. 

Did you know Frank Yparraguirre back then? 

S: Yes, we knew him, but he was quite 
older than us already, you know. He’s an old 
man now; I know he was a lot older than us. 
He was a Basque and he was pretty good to us, 
mostly. But them Germans, they’re somebody 
else again! You know, they.... You’d have to be 
out of town by 10:00 or else. 

Is that both Minden and Gardnerville that you 
had to be out of town? 

S: Oh, yes; they were both the same way. 

What was going on down in Minden? Anything 
happening there that is worth telling me about? 

S: Only thing, the train comes in; that’s all. 
Now, that was a great event! I can remember 
people come in spring wagons, come even 
from Woodfords, just to see the train pull in. 

These are Washo people who would come? 

S: Yes, them. Some people have horses, 
spring wagon, buggy or whatever. They’d go 
down there just to see the old train puff in. 

What would they do once the train came in? 

S: They’d watch it. They were surprised by 
it somehow or other. 

Did they sell any baskets down there or sell 
anything else to the people on the trains? 

S: No, not that I remember., .but they 
apparently did. 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


9 


You’ve been telling me about Basque handball 
courts and the Indian gambling games. 
Were there any sports that the Washo boys 
participated in? 

S: Yes, they had their own football game. 
I used to see that. That’s something similar to 
that Australian rules football, like you see on 
television now and then. They grab each other 
and pull each other down hard, and they held 
each other down. They were relatives, you 
know, one side to the other—good friends or 
relatives; that’s how they pick up their gang. 
They was there to beat the other and grab 
people up, you know. 

What was the ball made out of? 

S: Well, anything that was round. They 
made their own balls somehow. I don’t know, 
maybe they bought it in the store for all I 
know. Anyway, it was kind of a hard ball, but 
they’d kick it. They don’t grab it, but they had 
to kick it. 

How big was the field? Or would just any field 
do? 

S: Something similar to a football.... Then 
they’d have a goal there, and they’d kick it 
through there. They can’t throw it to them, 
but they have to kick it through. [At this 
point Mr. Sallee described with gestures a goal 
approximately 4 feet wide with a semicircular 
face 4 feet high at its center.] 

And this is an old Washo game that was played 
before the white man came here? 

S: Yes. 

Then the girls would have a game they 
called stick game. Women at Walley’s [Hot 
Springs] used to play that. They’d get a hoop 


made out of rag, weaved, which is maybe 
about [2 feet in diameter]. Then they got a 
stick, and they’d throw it... .throw that to each 
other with a stick. They don’t grab that either; 
they had to use a stick all the time. And that 
field was something similar to a football field, 
too. Now, that’s about the only thing I know 
about our games. 

Marvin, some people have been telling me 
about a Chinese family in Gardnerville that 
had a restaurant. 

D: Yes, there used to be a restaurant back 
there— place called Joyland. It was right 
there next to [where Magoo’s Pizza is now]. 
They used to have a restaurant there, and the 
white people can go in the restaurant to eat, 
but the Indians can’t go in there...eat with 
the white people. So they used to feed the 
Indians in the back. Eat outside along the 
pole piles there and stuff, until this Wallace 
Yim—he’s the boss of that restaurant there— 
he started to make a gambling house in the 
back of the restaurant.Then he add on an 
addition there. They put tables and chairs 
and everything in there, and the Indian can 
eat in the back, not in the front where the 
white people eat. 

So they have them separated like that. 
And then they treat those Indians pretty 
good there, by feeding them inside instead of 
feeding them on the outside; but they won’t 
let you go in the front. Until some of these 
people [Washo men] went to the army [during 
World War II] and they came back and they 
went in the front to eat, you know, and some 
people didn’t like it. And they told them—he 
says, “Indians supposed to eat back there, not 
in here.” 

“Who are you?” he says. He says, “I went 
to service, just like you did. I got a right to eat 
here, just as much as you do.” So they started 



10 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


eating in the front with the white people. They 
don’t say no more. 

So, that’s about the size of the story I 
know about that restaurant down there— 
those Chinese people. And they are pretty 
good people still, pretty good. Only one guy 
there now—this Wallace Yim. 

I’m wondering about some other places that 
Washos may have gathered. 

D: They used to gather right there around 
by the ditch just west of the telephone office. 
There used to be telephone office right there 
next to the restaurant. And straight back 
there there’s a ditch there. They used to 
gather there; play hand game and card game 
and every other thing.. And then they play 
hand game and card game over there by the 
jailhouse where Ted was mentioning where 
those Basque people play handballs and stuff. 
And so I used to be in there, too, watching the 
people play hand game and playing cards. I 
was pretty small., .not too small, though, but 
naughty, just like the rest of them! [laughter] 

When did all that stop? You don’t see Washos 
in town any more like that. 

D: They come to that when they start 
sending those people out of town. He said 
10:00, but I was pretty sure they sent them 
out of town already 6:00. Yes, at 6:00 you can’t 
hang around town any more, unless you’re 
going to a show. But if you’re going to a show, 
you have to have your parents with you to 
go to a show and stuff. Some older kids, they 
would sneak in all right. But then everybody 
would sort of let you hang around there after 
the show. So we used to walk home at nights 
after show; and it’s the only way we would 


get around is walk. So you walk nighttime; 
come home. 

Did either of you ever know Susie Dick? 

D: Yes, I know her. They used to call her 
Susie Dangberg because she lived there, yes. 

Where did she live? 

D: Right there where them willows are... 
Ted was talking— back there east of Minden. 
That...what’s that guy’s name? I forgot his 
name now, that Masgut. Willy Dick’s dad. 

S: Sammy. 

D: Sam Dick. Yes. That’s about all I know. 
They called her Susie Dangberg? 

D: Yes, they used to call her Susie 
Dangberg. She used to walk from town all 
the way up here with a sack of grocery on her 
back, and pack something else back down on 
her back. She’s walking from Minden to here 
[Dresslerville] and from here to Minden, as 
old as she was. Sometimes she bakes a cake 
and takes it to the jailhouse to the people she 
know that’s in jail, you know. 

Like Ted said a while ago, see, they never 
used to have that many officers as they got 
now. They probably got about 15 or 20 and 
those deputies and every other thing. Only 
one that used to run town was John Brown 
and Bill Parks. And I don’t know who was 
the judge then. 

S: Mason Krummes. 

D: Yes, I guess so. 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


11 


S: Mason Krummes was an old man—an 
old white man. 

Was he pretty tough on Washos? 

D: I didn’t know him. 

S: I didn’t know him too well either. You 
know, I was pretty young. I guess he put 
Washos in jail all the time down there—that 
old jail, you know. Very seldom see a white 
man in there. 

D: When I was growing up, start getting 
into troubles and stuff like that, get picked up 
even by walking, you know—go to jail. We 
had one judge down there called Selkirk. He 
was an old man. He was a tough, old man. 
He used to say, “How do you plead—guilty 
or not guilty?” Then if you’re guilty, you’re 
guilty. He said, “You’re in jail, ain’t you? Then 
you are guilty. If you’re not guilty,” he says, 
“you’d be outside.” 

Then I told him, I said, “Well, I didn’t do 
anything. I just walk out, and guys pick me 
up, and cop come along.” I said, “They pick 
us up, and I’m here.” 

Then he says, “Well, you don’t have to 
do a thing. Just be there get you in trouble.” 
That’s what he used to say. 

Did you get picked up often? 

D: Oh, I never drink when I was young. 
I smoke a lot but never drink. And like I say, 
I start walking or something on the highway 
maybe, and cop come along and pick me up; 
haul me back down or something. I got so 
used to that. 

I got drunk one time. I drove right down 
in there and parked the car, and I walked 


in. I says, “Well, I’m here. I’m drunk. You’ll 
have to lock me up, I guess.” So they put me 
in jail and turned me out 6:00 next morning, 
[laughter] I got to where I put myself in jail 
instead of them come and get me. 

Where were you getting whiskey? Was this 
after the Second World War? 

D: Oh, see, it was against the law for 
white man to get any liquor at all. So we find 
some white man that’s kind of hungry or 
something, you know, and give him a dollar 
or 2 extra and tell him to get us a bottle. Then 
he goes and get a bottle; he set it someplace, 
and he tell us where it is, and then we go pick 
it up. That way they can’t catch us, see. 

Was there any bar here in the Carson Valley 
that would sell liquor to Indians? 

D: No, not that time, until it must have 
been around about 1952, 1953, they turn the 
liquor loose to the Indians. 5 Then you see 
people all over in the bars. That time already 
I lived in Alturas then—when they turn that 
liquor loose; everybody was drinking then. 

If either of you can remember any of the 
traditional ways of living that were still being 
practiced while you were young in the 1920s 
and 1930s, I’d like to hear about them—and 
particularly things that were being done in 
your own families. 

S: Well, most of my family went to the 
happy hunting ground. In fact, you might say 
I’m the only one now. They all practiced the 
same thing, you know. They were basically 
the same; all the families were families. There 
was no difference. 



12 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


Were rabbit drives still an important part of 
the culture in the 1920s and 1930s? 

S: Yes. Still is. 

D: Still is today. 

You are a rabbit boss, aren’t you, Marvin? 

D: That’s the one I was talking about the 
other day on that tape. 6 Yes. It’s the same thing. 
And today, people still go out and hunt rabbit. 
They start out with maybe 5, 10, 15, 20 and 
end up 100 people sometimes. And they line 
up at shooting distance. That’s about all they 
do with the.... See, these white people have 
homes all over now where we used to hunt, 
ride, drive rabbits and stuff. They tell you not 
to hunt there, because you can’t shoot a mile 
from the housing and stuff like that. 

When you were young, where was the best place 
to hunt rabbits? 

D: We go hunt out there in the sagebrush— 
that’s about the only place; you don’t go out 
there in the Pine Nut Hills. There’s not very 
many rabbits out there anyway. Out here in 
the flat next to the alfalfa fields, and that’s 
about all where we hunt rabbits. 

That was right here next to Dresslerville, then? 

D: Yes. 

A man by the name of Mike Holbrook, 
before he died, we’d sit down out there, and 
he used to talk. He told me, “Pretty soon, 
we won’t be living here in Dresslerville. The 
white man going to have houses from down 
here and on this way. They’re going to start 
building houses... inside a month or 2 you’re 
going to see 100 houses, maybe more—300, 


400, 500 houses.” He says, “All this place 
up this way, past Dresslerville, going to be 
houses, always there. You can’t hunt there no 
more, because they won’t let you hunt. And 
people are going to start moving in here,” he 
says, “getting next to the Washos. And some 
of these Washos won’t like it, and then they’re 
going to move out there in the hills in their 
own Pine Nut land and stuff; they’re going to 
live out there, and we’ll all be chased out in 
the Pine Nut Hills into them rocks.” 

He said that one time, and I didn’t believe 
him then, what he said. He kind of talked 
foolish, you know, and he’d laugh and joke and 
stuff. But he told that to me, and I didn’t believe 
it then. But see, after he passed away, first house 
I’d seen was over that top of the hill. Dr. T. V. 
Ross, I think, was the first house there. Then 
pretty soon next house, next house; before I 
know it was 10 houses, 15,20 houses all along 
through there to start. Now is the houses over 
there and up—the Ranchos is ending right 
here straight across from Dresslerville, all the 
way across to Tillman Tane and up to Snake 
Hill. There’s a place there now. 

I believe what he said, you know, after I 
see it. And I’ve seen these people...some of 
these people are living out there yet [in the 
Washo Pine Nut allotments to the southeast]. 
That Manson Henry., .he passed away, but 
his wife is still out there. Tommy Smokey’s 
out there and Garfield Frank’s out there in 
the hills. And I don’t know; Reed’s trying to 
move out there, too, now. See, I don’t know 
how many people are going to be out there in 
the Pine Nut Hills. Now they got these new 
houses [1983-1984 federal housing project] 
up here in Dresslerville; I guess that stops it 
all—nobody’s going to move any more from 
here, the way these houses are coming up. 
And they say they’re going to order for some 
more houses coming in, so that’s how it is. 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


13 


Have you spent much time roaming the Pine 
Nuts back there? 

D: No. 

What about you, Ted? Have you ever spent any 
time back there? 

S: Not really. 

I’ve talked to other, older people who have told 
me a lot about gathering pine nuts back in the 
Pine Nut Hills. They tell me that very often 
they’ll make a big mound of green pine nuts 
and set fire to them in order to make them open 
up, so they can get the nuts out. 

D: Yes. 

Now, I went back there with another fellow 
one day, a white man who’s an archaeologist 
[Dr. Gene Hattori of the Desert Research 
Institute] and we found great circles of charcoal 
throughout the Pine Nuts back there. We 
thought that’s where wood burners had made 
charcoal to sell to Virginia City. Some people 
tell us they think that’s where the Washo had 
built mounds of pine nuts and burned them. 
Do either one of you know anything about that? 

D: Yes.... 

Have you ever seen those big circles back there? 

D: First they gather brushes, you—kind 
of green brushes. They pile it up maybe 3 feet 
high and about 4 feet in diameter—round, you 
know—and then they make kind of hole like on 
top. Then they dump the pine nut on top of it 
and make a big mound and then light it. After 
they light it, the fire goes down to where the pine 
nut burns pretty heavy, pretty hot, you know. 


They get a long pole, until the.... When 
the brushes burn down, pine nut all went 
down with the charcoal and everything. They 
get that stick and they stir it and stir those 
charcoals out from underneath there. Then 
they push the dirt together with a shovel, 
and they make a big pile of dirt, ashes and 
everything until the pine nut is cooked. Then 
they open it up, and they start taking those 
pine nuts out. Of course, some open up and 
some of them is not open, so they open it with 
the hand and take the pine nuts out. They call 
that pumse-k. 

They call the pine nut pumse-k when they get 
it out, or the process...? 

D: No, the whole thing, like when they’re 
cooking it, yes. They call it dese-gi’. It’s roasted 
or whatever— in charcoal. 

Which kind of pine nuts are the best—the ones 
that are roasted from the green pine cones or 
the ones that are ripe and fall out of the brown 
pine cones? 

D: The ones that fall out on the ground 
and roasted in charcoal. 

D: They call that dayo-basi’. They’re the 
best. You make pine nut soup out of that. But 
this other dese-gi’, you eat that when you just 
peel off the shell. They’re white inside. 

Well, tell me, have you ever gone deer hunting 
up there, or have you ever tramped around in 
the Pine Nut Range? 

D: Oh, yes. 

Have you seen these big circles I’m talking about 
up there? 



14 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


D: Yes, I know what they are. 

Is that made by the pine nuts? 

D: Yes, well, made by the people.... 

By Indian people. 

D: Yes, the Washos. Well, there is the 
Paiute come across from the other side, and 
they do that, too. They do the same thing. 

Did you ever hear of any white people making 
charcoal up there? 

D: No. 

S: They said that they used to have Chinese 
out there. 

What have you heard about that? 

S: The Chinese would make charcoal 
in a certain place, mostly around Mineral 
Mountain there. That’s where you probably 
will see them—great big places where you see 
charcoals and stuff maybe as big as this room. 
Too big of a place for them to cook pine nuts. 
But the Chinks were making charcoal. 

D: Coal. 

S: Coal or whatever it is, you know, they’d 
ship somewheres. 

Who told you this? You learned this from...? 

D: That was just a story about what’s going 
on. 

S: A story. 

D: Yes, years ago. 


You heard this from other Washo people, or did 
white people tell you this? 

S: Well, Washo people, the old-timers. 
That’s where lots of people got introduced to... 
they call it “Chinese gin,” you know. 

No, what’s that? 

S: That’s something to drink, like gin. 
That’s what it is—gin—only they call it 
Chinese gin. Yes, and they had to introduce... 
yenshee and stuff like that, you know, dope. 
That’s something they smoked—the Chinese. 

D: Sayni’bagku. [Literally, “Chinese 
tobacco.”] 

S: It would make you dream about funny 
things that’s not there, you know. So they say; 
I don’t know; I never did try them! [laughing] 

The Washo people would meet Chinese people 
out in the Pine Nuts? 

S: Well, usually in Carson [City]...there 
was a regular Chinatown there in Carson. I 
remember that. We used to go down there 
and eat something a while. See, the Chinese 
always had great restaurants and stuff. But it 
used to kind of scare me because the way they 
dressed, you know—black dress and black 
clothes and the long hair. I remember that a 
little bit. Used to scare me; I had no use for 
them! 

There weren’t very many Chinese here, were 
there, in Minden and Gardnerville? 

S: By then, I guess they.... 

D: They’re modern people; I guess they 
dress just like a white man. 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


15 


S: Oh, there was 2 or 3 restaurants around. 

I was talking this morning with Bernice 
Auchoberry. She was telling me about Double 
Spring Flats. She said that her grandparents 
had told her that that’s where most of the 
Washo used to gather every year for the dance 
that they would hold prior to going out and 
collecting pine nuts. Have the 2 of you ever been 
told any stories about Double Spring Flats? Do 
you know anything about it? 

D: No. 

S: There’s a Indian story which goes on 
and on, forever. 

D: Well, different ones have different.... 

S: Different versions of that story 
Can one of you tell me a version of it now? 

S: Well, I’ve forgot now. 

Do you remember one, Marvin? 

D: Not that I know of. Only place I know 
where they say that Indian used to live and 
gather around... the other side of Dangberg 
Hill or someplace, they call it ‘ma-s tiyel. That’s 
where the Indian used to live—’’big land.” 
That’s Hot Spring Hill, across this east side 
on this side of Stewart. 

S: Yes. This side of the prison, there. It was 
right there directly east of that Cradlebaugh 
bridge. 7 

D: People back then, they lived there. And 
they go pick pine nut from there, different 
places. See, they don’t call it their land; 
they call it ‘ma-s. It means they got a share 


in there where they can pick. See, different 
Indian, different Washos, they have different 
‘ma-s, like different land where they pick... 
the picking area. So if you go to their picking 
area where you’re not supposed to be, they’ll 
fight you—break up your pole, your basket; 
spill your pine nuts and whatever, unless you 
are related; then you can pick either side, you 
know. 

Is that still true today? 

D: Well, not now. Anybody can pick 
now—white man, Paiute, Shoshone, whatever. 
They pick along through all them hills now. 

What about when you were a boy? Was it still 
true then, that you had your own ‘ma-s? 

D: No. Well, I don’t remember that. But 
they had this trouble like that out there. We 
used to just go out there and camp and pick 
pine nut, trying to camp as far away from 
another camp that we could—mostly up 
here at the Leviathan mine; a place called 
cuhu’mayu-k. That’s where we used to pick 
pine nut. Cuhu’mayu-k means “stick scatterer”. 
Had a bunch of stick scattered, laying around 
all over. 

And you say that’s near the Leviathan mine? 

D: Yes. On this side is a pine nut hill there, 
where people pick pine nut. There’re several 
camps out there usually, and a lot of them this 
other way. 

I’m very much interested in that place you’re 
talking about in the northeastern corner of 
Carson Valley. I went there once. We walked 
around it last year, and we found a lot of things 
that indicated that it was a settled area. Is this 
near the hot springs? 



16 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


D and S: Yes. 

D: There used to be a lot of rocks and... 
Indian rocks— what they call ‘la-m, “mortar,” 
you know, and that grinding stone and 
rollers. 

Is it what’s called a bicik? 

D: Yes, bicik. And gamun and ‘itdemge’ 
and everything there. It’s hidden there, some 
people buried it, or they just covered over. 
Wind cover over, you know; you can’t find 
them. But these people across here [at Washo 
Tribal Council headquarters], they ask me to 
go along with them down there and find the 
place and find those rocks and put them up 
for exhibit and stuff to show, [laughter] I told 
them, “No, no, not me,” I said. “If you want 
to go get it, go get it, because I’m not going to 
mess around with that.” see, Indian belief is 
never to touch the dead people’s belongings. 
Either you’ll get sick or get crippled or 
whatever. So they don’t bother their people’s... 
what they left or what they put away, see, after 
they die. The people put it away after they die 
or something, never to touch it. 

And the Washos don’t believe in having 
feathers...put feather in their head, in their 
hair, or around their hats and stuff, like 
Paiutes and Shoshone do, because they 
respect that eagle pretty good. Only one 
that can have the feathers is a kind of Indian 
doctor or dreamer or somebody that smoke, 
you know, and pray for you. The praying man 
or something like that. They’re the only one 
that can handle the eagle feather. If you’re 
going to have to handle that feather, you’ll 
have to have one of those Indian doctors 
to pray for you and pray for the feather, so 
you can have it in your possession. And you 
have to treat it like it was alive— give it water 


every 4 months or 4 weeks or every 4 days or 
whatever; 4 to each one, you know. 

Is 4 a very important number? 

D: Yes. You get sick if you don’t take care 
of it like you should. If the Indian doctor 
tell you to water it, talk to it so many times 
a month or so many times a year, that’s what 
you got to do. Otherwise you have to leave 
it alone. See, the Washos never believe in 
bothering with a feather. 

And even the rattlesnake...those rattles, 
they never touch them; it’s just kind of 
dangerous. You’ll get sick with that if one of 
your family or any of your people—the old 
people, maybe, or some people that’s kind 
of lame, crippled or something—they get 
worse if you got it and don’t take care of it, 
you know. So they never bother to mess with 
those kind. Unless Paiute people...they do it. 
They take the rattler off, put in on their hair 
or their hat or put it on their shirt—pin it on, 
walk around. And they say never to count 
those rattlers—the numbers. How many 
rattlers he’s got, never to count them. 

Bad luck? 

D: Yes. 

I understand that the Paiute people did not 
get along very well with the Washo people in 
times past. 

D: Well, they had a few arguments about 
different things, but I guess they don’t do 
that any more. Of course, there’s a whole 
mess of half-breed Paiutes, half-breed 
Shoshones or half-breed different people 
like Navajos now, you know, since people 
going to Stewart school, this and that, you 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


17 


know. Stewart was the Washo’s school, but 
they have Paiute and Shoshone and different 
other people that’s going to school there. 
That’s why it is called Wa-pa-shon, for 
Washo, Paiute, Shoshone. 

I’ve heard that maybe the Washos and the 
Paiute once had a war to decide who would 
ride horses. 

D: I don’t know about that. 

Some Paiutes say that that’s how they ride 
horses today and the Washo do not. Of course, 
Washos do ride horses now, but for some time I 
understand they didn’t. Did your grandparents 
ever tell you any stories about a war between 
the Washo and the Paiute? 

D: No. 

And you either, Ted? 

S: No. 

Both of you worked on the Dressier ranch at 
one time, didn’t you? 

D: Well, I never have; I worked on 
Settlemeyer ranch. Many time I pass Dressier 
ranch. There used to be old folks there; some 
relatives lived there. So I used to visit there 
and stay there. 

Who was that? 

D: Edna Coleman and ‘Ambi George; 
Norman George, La-man George, Ho-ni 
and all them people; they used to live there. 
They’re all gone now. 

They were all related to you? 


D: Yes. So I used to come down there 
and spend a night or 2, maybe a week; then 
go back home. See, the relatives— they used 
to cook there, and then pay 504 and you 
get whole big dishpan full of food and a big 
tomato can gallon of tea and pie...everything, 
for 504 a long time ago. 

At the Dressier ranch? 

D: Yes. 

From the Dresslers themselves? 

D: Yes. 

Out of their kitchen there? 

D: Yes. 

Who was that doing it? Was that Fred’s wife, 
or was it Bill Dressier and his wife? 

D: Well, Fred’s wife. After Bill was gone, 
I guess. 

So it’d be Anna Dressier, then, who used to 
do that? 

D: Well, Bill was alive here lately. [William 
Dressier died in 1946.] I knew Bill. He was 
cremated, you know; they put him up in Job’s 
Peak He told Duwa Johnson, “You better work, 
because I’ll be watching you every day” He says, 
“I’llbeon top ofthathill, so....” Duwa Johnson used 
to work from daylight to sundown. Never quits. 

Working on Dressier land? 

D: Yes. 

Did the Dresslers treat the Washos pretty well? 



18 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


D: Yes. Every time you go over there, give 
you something to eat. Even now he [Fred 
Dressier] tell me some time go over there and 
have some ba-gabu-la-das —is bull meat. 

You worked for Fred Dressier, didn’t you, Ted? 

S: Yes. I don’t know too much about the 
other Washos, but I got along pretty good with 
old Fred. 

When did you start working there? 

S: I don’t know, exactly. It’s been about 10, 
12 years back. I know he’s a pretty good guy; 
he’s about the best I get along with. He didn’t 
bother nobody; I mean, he tells you what to do, 
and he expects you to do it—leaves you alone. 
That’s one of the best things about old Fred, 
because he expects you to do a good job; he 
don’t want no haphazard job. He treated me all 
right, you know. Of course, I don’t know about 
the rest of these Indians that would work. 

I’m kind of curious as to which ranch is the 
best ranch for Washos to work on in the Carson 
Valley. Has anybody ever talked about that 
when you were young? 

S: Well, they were all about the same. 
Everybody had their own favorite bosses, 
hike me: when I was a youngster, I worked 
for Heise myself—Heise brothers out here by 
Centerville. That’s where I started working. 

Does Fred speak Washo? 

S: Yes, fluently. 

D: Oh, yes. 

He speaks it well enough so everybody can 
understand? 


S: Oh, yes. He can talk to me. See, I could 
drive for him, after he had a heart attack. Want 
to go to Reno or Bridgeport or someplace, I 
could drive the vehicle for him. And he’d get 
in the back and go to sleep; tell me where he 
want to go, you know. By the time I get there, 
I’d wake him up. Out at Bridgeport, I’d tell 
him, “Well, we’re here.” The first thing he want 
to do there is go to the cafe and have a cup of 
coffee and doughnut or something., .because 
you never go hungry driving for that guy! 
[laughter] Then noontime come along, why, 
that’s something else; you could eat whatever 
you want, and he pays for it. He talks good 
Washo and everything like that. Pretty nice 
old man to get along with. 

He told me a story about a group of rocks that’s 
back behind his property. 

S: Pasa pawdi’. It’s along the valley up here. 
What do the 2 of you know about that? 

S: Pasa pawdi’ means that the wood rat 
fell over the hill there. That’s an Indian story; 
now I don’t know the story. What do you say, 
maybe he do. 

Do you know the story, Marvin? 

D: No, I don’t know. I heard about the 
place, but I never hear about it. There’s 
different places like that down in the valley 
they call that...on this side of this end. They call 
that deyu-geT; k’ilahat. Means pine nut soup. 

S: Ridge? 

D: Yes, pine nut soup ridge. 

Do you know any stories about the Carson 
Valley before the white man came? I understand 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


19 


there’s a big kind of rocky scar behind Genoa. 
There’s a big place up there that is all bare rocks; 
and there’s supposed to be some story about 
that, but I don’t know what the story is. 

S: Something had pulled brushes there 
for some reason. I don’t know that really, but 
something hide there. If you want to find it, 
you pull a lot of brush away, so the brush never 
did come back and grow there no more. That’s 
about all I know about that. 

I was told them stories when I was a kid, 
but like every other kid I thought I’d know it 
forever. You know, I just didn’t write it down 
or nothing. See, the old Indians, when they 
tell you the story, he says, “You never want 
to sit down and listen.” He said, “Lay down. 
Lay down in your bed sideways or whatever, 
in the best position, you know, and listen.” 
I never did hear the end of it. I’m asleep, 
[laughing] That was the main purpose of 
them stories. 

D: Yes. 

S: They never tell a story in the daytime, 
either. 

D: Then they ask you in the morning, 
“What did I say last night?” Huh! I don’t know, 
see? You never hear the end of it. You hear 
part of it. 

And that way you can keep telling the same 
story night after night? 

D: Yes. 

Both of your families were still using some 
natural material for food and for building when 
you were younger. I’d like to know where they 
got these things. Let’s start with tule reeds that 
they used to build their wickiups. Ted, did you 


ever live in a wickiup, or did your grandparents 
live in one? 

S: No, I never did, except maybe out in 
the Pine Nut Hills. They’ll make shade out of 
kind of like a wickiup with a canvas. But those 
using tules, well, that’s beyond my time. 

Marvin, you said you lived in one for a while. 
Was there a particularly favorite tule reed 
gathering place here in the valley? 

D: No. See, once you build them you can’t 
take it apart or can’t do anything unless you’re 
going to rebuild them. Then you can pull 
those old tules down and build new ones on 
top of that again—rebuild, just like you were 
fixing another house. But it’s the same thing 
like these they got now. A lot of these people, 
they believing about this sweat house? You 
know, the., .you can’t tear it down. Only one 
that can tear them down is the one that built 
it, otherwise it’s no good; it’s bad luck to you if 
you tear it down when you’re not supposed to, 
see. So., .it’s the same thing, like I said a while 
back. I lived in those tule wickiups. A winter 
house, they call that. They call it galis dangal. 
This white man now talking about water bed, 
and they’re talking about this seat belt. I think 
I was the first guy that ever invented water bed 
and seat belt: when you wet your bed, my dad 
give me a spanking on the seat! That’s why 
I says I was the first guy that ever invented 
water bed and seat belt long before the white 
man ever mentioned water bed and seat belt, 
[laughing] 

You ate elderberries, too, didn’t you, when you 
were younger? 

D: You can’t eat them straight. 

Yes, but jelly...? 



20 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


D: You got to mix it with the peaches, 
apple or whatever, you know It’s too bitter, 
and you just can’t eat it straight. 

Where was the best place to gather elderberries? 

D: Along Genoa, I think, you get them. 
Oh, I guess you can make straight elderberry 
jam. 

S: It takes a lot or sugar, though. I never 
made them, but I seen my mother used to 
make them. 

D: I was thinking about buckberries, 
wouldn’t you say that? You can’t even put that 
in you mouth, it’s so bitter. But elderberry, you 
could. 

You were hunting rabbits around here in the 
sagebrush out behind Dresslerville, getting 
elderberries over next to Genoa, pine nuts in 
the Pine Nut Ridge over to the east. 

D: Yes. 

Was anything going on in the northern end of 
the valley? We were talking earlier about those 
hot springs that are up in the northeastern 
part of the valley where that large Washo 
encampment used to be. In your lifetime was 
that area ever used for anything by the Washos? 

D: I don’t think so., .no, never was used. 

S: That was before my time. 

D: Yes, that place called Hobo Hot Spring, 
that’s on the west side. That was the Indian hill. 
I remember that; there used to be an Indian 
used to live there. Some Indians used to live 
there a long time ago. And on the east side, I 
don’t remember anybody’s ever used that. 


We were going to go there one time. They 
got a little pond over there, but the water is so 
hot you can’t even put your foot in the water. 
And they said that you can’t take a bath in 
that water because those Indian died back 
there— a whole bunch of them. 

Yes, right there where I call that ‘mas 
tiyel, that’s where the Indians used to live, 
something grow there one time, and a lot of 
people died there. That’s where they got this 
Indian rocks and everything that some people 
like to get at. Some people already living there 
and stuff. So you can’t use that hot spring that’s 
there. Well, maybe white man can; see, they 
have different blood than we got... different 
from Indian blood. They have a belief against 
using that water for baths or anything. 

They used to go across over to the west 
side in a place called Hobo Hot Spring. That’s 
where a lot of people used to go and swim 
and stuff there, you know. If you got a sore 
or you got rheumatism or something, you 
get in that water several times, maybe you get 
a little better or something like that—some 
mineral water or something that’s out of there 
that makes you feel better. I don’t know about 
getting well with it, but I know you get well 
there with your sores or whatever you got on 
you leg or wherever you got sore, they fall off. 
You don’t have any more, see; it’d heal in that 
water. 

You said that something grew over in ‘mas tiyel. 

D: Yes. I don’t know what they were that 
they grow there, and some people that lived 
there. That’s why they don’t want to have 
anybody touching nothing over there— that 
Indian rocks and stuff, you know. 

How long ago was that? 

D: Oh, it way before my time. 



A Contribution to a Survey of Life of in Carson Valley 


21 


Before the white man? 

D: Yes. Well, I guess there was white man, 
too, then. Of course, this Johnny Frank used 
to mention where he came there, and he was 
an Indian doctor and kind of power man. He 
said he went and talked with somebody and 
prayed for them, and in spirit he said that he 
went to heaven and wanted to come back. 
See, he know what heaven and happy hunting 
ground look like, so he used to tell me about 
that. But sometime... some way didn’t like to tell 
it the way heaven or the happy hunting ground 
really look like. But he said people from here 
go there; it’s a place of no return. People cross 
the river, and you never come back. 

And that’s where the people from ‘mas tiyel all 
went? 

D: Yes. Just like the Bible says, you got to 
cross the river; you can’t cross the river alone. 
Somebody got to reach across to get you, catch 
hold of your hand. And you go across the river 
and you never come back. But if somebody 
reach for you, and then you hold your hand 
back, maybe you did and you fall off or fail in 
a ditch or fall in a river. Then you come back 
to yourself, come alive again. See, you don’t go 
on the other side. That’s the old Indian belief. 

Are there any other places here in the Carson 
Valley that are like that place where the spring 
is? Any other places here in the Carson Valley 
where many Washo used to live but no longer 
do? 


D: I heard about that, but I don’t know 
why. I don’t know anything about it. A lot of 
people in Genoa and over here at Sheridan; 
that’s why it’s called that Indian Road, and I 
don’t know what else. There’s quite a bit of 
places there along the foothill. 

And what would you use the foothills for? Did 
Washos ever hunt deer up there, is that it? 

D: They lived there. I guess they live 
certain place. They live where they’re working 
for some people, or they live together and they 
go from there to where they’re working, back 
and forth. They go in the buggies or horseback 
or even walk. 

We’ve covered a lot of topics today. Is there 
anything that either one of you would care to 
add to this before we call it a day? Are there 
any questions I should have asked and failed to? 

S: Not that I know of. 

I think we’ve learned a lot about the Washos in 
the twentieth century in this valley, anyway. 
You’ve told me a great deal about how life 
was here. I’ve gotten more information from 
other people. When we put it all together, 
we’ll have a pretty good picture of what it 
was like to live here from the beginning of 
this century up to the present. Thanks very 
much for your time. 

S: That’s all right. 


D: Not that I know. 

Any large gathering grounds? I was told by a 
white person over in Genoa that he thought 
there was a large Washo Indian gathering 
ground to the south. 




Notes 


1. The name in question may be a Washo 
name that is phonetically similar. It would be 
orthographically represented as B+yna. 

2. Although Mr. Sallee said to spell the name 
B-e-a-r, it maybe more accurately represented 
as Beya. 

3. Fred Settelmeyer states that Henry Dressier 
worked for his family for more than 50 years. 
Mr. Settelmeyer was born in 1892, and Henry 
Dressier was already a Settelmeyer hand at 
that time. 

4. Laverone refers to the site of the Laverone 
(spelled various ways) homestead in the 
extreme southern end of the Carson Valley. 
In 1984 the property was owned by Fred 
Dressier, but it had passed through several 
other hands over the years. For a lengthy 
period it was part of the Settelmeyer ranch. 

5. H.R. 1055 (Public Law 277) of 15 
August 1953, an act to eliminate certain 
discriminatory legislation against Indians, 


repealed the federal prohibition against sale 
of alcohol to Indians. 

6. The UNR Oral History Program has in its 
collection a videotape of Marvin Dressier 
discussing the rabbit drive. 

7. The site is adjacent to a marsh at the 
northeastern end of the Carson Valley. 




Photographs 



Washo women gambling at the hand game, probably behind the 
Krummes blacksmith shop in Gardnerville, ca. 1910. 



































26 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 



Washo eating a pan meal behind the Dressier Ranch House, ca. 1910. 



Washo in front of the tule galis danal (winter house), ca. 1910. 

Photographs courtesy of Special Collections, University of Nevada, Reno Library. First photograph from 
Lorenzo Creel collection. This page, top, Fred Dressier collection; bottom, Lorenzo Creel collection. 















Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



28 


Marvin Dressler and Ted Sallee 


B 


Basques (Carson Valley), 
13-15 


Laverone ranch (Carson Valley), 
5-10, 43 (Note 4) 

Legends/myths, 30-32, 35-36, 
39-41 


Chinese (Carson Valley), 
26-28 



Dick, Susie, 19 
Dressier, Big Fred, 4 
Dressier, Bill, 4, 33 
Dressier, Fred, 34-35 
Dressier, Harry, 3, 5-6, 
9-10 

Dressier, Henry, 4-5 
Dressier, Kitty, 4 
Dressier, Molly, 4, 12 
Dressier family (Car 
Valley) , 4-10 
Dressier (Bill 

(Carson Valleyj^S*^?^ 
Dressle 


raging and gathering, 
6-7, 22, 24-26, 29-30, 
37-38 

Fred, Amelia, 3 


Sallee, Tom, 1-2, 10-11 
Sallee family (Carson Valley), 
10-12 

Sport and leisure. 

Structures/place 
Valley): cc 

Double ^Springs Flat, 28; 

social), 
o Hot Springs, 
land Cafe, 17; 
t Indian School, 32; 
ephone office, 18; Washo 
structures, 8-9, 37 


Vedo, Sally, 2-3 


Washo, discrimination against, 
13, 15, 17-21, 43 (Note 5) 
Washo, naming, 4-5 


H 


Holbrook, Mike, 22-23 


Yim, Wallace, 17-18 


J 

Johnson, Buena, 1-2 
Johnson, Jenny, 2-3 




