Barbara Bennett: 

Mayor of Reno and Community Activist 


Interviewee: Barbara Bennett 
Interviewed: 1988 
Published: 1989 
Interviewer: Lenore M. Kosso 
UNOHP Catalog #150 


Description 

Barbara Bennett was born in 1923 in Oakland, California. Her oral history begins with a heartbreaking description of 
her early years there. Despite poverty, ill-treatment and neglect she survived and became more resilient, independent 
and strong. She describes leaving home at the age of thirteen and becoming self-supporting. She worked for caring 
people who insisted that she complete her education. College plans didn’t work out because of World War II, and 
Barbara Bennett went to work in Bay Area defense plants. When the war ended she lost her job and her independence, 
like so many other women, to returning servicemen. She realized that it was a “man’s world” at that time. 

She married John Bennett, a returning serviceman, and continued to live in Oakland, where she and John started 
their family—two daughters and a son. Their family was first and foremost in her life, and no decisions affecting the 
family were made unilaterally. In 1964 the Bennetts moved to Reno, and Barbara went to work for the telephone 
company. While she scored well on company examinations, she was unsuccessful in getting promotions. This 
experience, among others, led her to become interested in issues and causes. This was when affirmative action for 
minorities was beginning, but before people over forty had started organizing over age-related injustices in the 
workplace. 

In 1970, armed with statistics proving discrimination, Bennett again applied for a promotion, but to no avail. 
While she had what was probably a winning case of discrimination in court, she couldn’t afford to fight it, and she 
eventually left the phone company. Since then the company has made strides in improving conditions for women 
in her age bracket; her determination and plain stubbornness helped bring about changes to benefit other people. 

Injustice to herself and to others eventually led Barbara Bennett to become active in women’s issues and ultimately 
to be instrumental in forming the Nevada Women’s Political Caucus. The Equal Rights Amendment was at the 
forefront of women’s issues, and the Women’s Political Caucus wanted to secure male and female candidates who 
grasped the issues of women in the workplace and women in their homes. Through these efforts, the city of Reno 
and Washoe County had female members on various boards, and eventually had several women city and county 
commissioners. 

Nevada’s racial minorities are another group whose lives have been touched because Barbara Bennett couldn’t stand 
the injustices meted out to them. She describes her feeling when the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated. 
Once more she marched on another cause and fought racial discrimination in housing and jobs. 

In the early 1970s, the Bennetts moved from their house into a mobile home—they wanted a home they could 
afford in retirement. Unfortunately, mobile home park landlords in Nevada became greedy, forcing some retirees 
out of their mobile homes because of “atrocious” increases in rates for space. Barbara Bennett founded the Nevada 
Homeowners Association, and through this group righted many of the wrongs. 


(Continued on next page.) 


Description (continued) 


By this time, Barbara Bennett had attained the name recognition necessary to run for public office. Hers was a name 
not always popular with special interest groups, but she had a public profile. Bennett ran for county commissioner 
in 1975 and was defeated. In 1977, she ran for Reno City Council and lost again, but in 1979 she ran for mayor of 
Reno and won. Barbara Bennett was a formidable opponent at all times because she was so well prepared for the 
task at hand. She was honest and the people knew it; even her opponents acknowledged that she had no price tag. 
Bennett opposed the enormous campaign contributions provided by special interest groups, and accepted none. 
She was truly of the people. 

In this oral history Mrs. Bennett provides a detailed history of the problems Washoe County and Reno faced in the 
1970s to 1980s. She is exceptionally candid in her descriptions of the people she encountered along the way and 
the people she worked with as an elected official. Barbara Bennett has long been affiliated with Common Cause, 
both locally and nationally, and has brought a lot of pride to members of the organization. She has received formal 
recognition of her good work at local and national levels. 

In his 1820 sketch, “The Wife,” Washington Irving wrote: “There is in every true womans heart a spark of heavenly 
fire, which lies dormant in the broad daylight of prosperity, but which kindles up and beams and blazes in the dark 
hour of adversity.” Mr. Irving must have known someone very much like Barbara Bennett when he was inspired 
to write those words. 


Barbara Bennett: 

Mayor of Reno and Community Activist 




Barbara Bennett: 

Mayor of Reno and Community Activist 


An Oral History Conducted by Lenore M. Kosso 
Edited by Helen M. Blue and R.T. King 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1989 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1989. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 

Director: R.T. King 
Publications Editor: Helen M. Blue 
Text Production: Linda I. Sommer, Kay M. Stone, 
Donna Duke-Koelfgen, Sabina Spielvogel 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words maybe quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition vii 

Original Preface ix 

Introduction xi 

1. Formative Years 1 

2. Marriage, Family, and Employment 9 

3. Becoming a Political Activist 15 

4. County Commission and City Council Campaigns 25 

5. Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 33 

6. With the Nevada Youth Services, Common Cause, and the Ethics Commission 67 

7. Reflections on Nevada Politics 75 

8. Epilogue 81 

Original Index: For Reference Only 89 




Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Barbara Bennett 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Original Preface 


Since 1965 the University of Nevada Oral 
History Program (UNOHP) has produced 
over 200 works similar to the one at hand. 
Following the precedent established by Allan 
Nevins at Columbia University in 1948 (and 
perpetuated since by academic programs 
such as ours throughout the English-speaking 
world) these manuscripts are called oral 
histories. Unfortunately, some confusion 
surrounds the meaning of the term. To the 
extent that these ‘oral’ histories can be read, 
they are not oral, and while they are useful 
historical sources, they are not themselves 
history. Still, custom is a powerful force; 
historical and cultural records that originate 
in tape-recorded interviews are almost 
uniformly labeled ‘oral histories’, and our 
program follows that usage. 

Among oral history programs, differences 
abound in the way information is collected, 
processed and presented. At one end of 
a spectrum are some that claim to find 
scholarly value in interviews which more 
closely resemble spontaneous encounters 
than they do organized efforts to collect 


information. For those programs, any 
preparation is too much. The interviewer 
operates the recording equipment and serves 
as the immediate audience, but does not 
actively participate beyond encouraging the 
chronicler to keep talking. Serendipity is the 
principal determinant of the historical worth 
of information thus collected. 

The University of Nevada’s program 
strives to be considerably more rigorous in 
selecting chroniclers, and in preparing for 
and focusing interviews. When done by the 
UNOHP, these firsthand accounts are meant 
to serve the function of primary source 
documents, as valuable in the process of 
historiography as the written records with 
which historians customarily work. However, 
while the properly conducted oral history is 
a reliable source, verifying the accuracy of 
all of the statements made in the course of 
an interview would require more time and 
money than the UNOHP’s operating budget 
permits. The program can vouch that the 
statements were made, and that the chronicler 
has approved the edited manuscript, but it 



Barbara Bennett 


xii 


does not assert that all are entirely free of 
error. Accordingly, our oral histories should 
be approached with the same caution that 
the prudent reader exercises when consulting 
government records, newspaper accounts, 
diaries and other sources of historical 
information. 

Each finished manuscript is the product 
of a collaboration—its structure influenced 
by the directed questioning of an informed, 
well-prepared interviewer, and its articulation 
refined through editing. While the words in 
this published oral history are essentially 
those of Mrs. Bennett, the text is not a 
verbatim transcription of the interview as it 
occurred. In producing a manuscript, it is 
the practice of the UNOHP to employ the 
language of the chronicler, but to edit for 
clarity and readability. By shifting text when 
necessary, by polishing syntax, and by deleting 
or subsuming the questions of the interviewer, 
a first-person narrative with chronological 
and topical order is created. Mrs. Bennett has 
reviewed the finished manuscript of her oral 
history and affirmed in writing that it is an 
accurate representation of her statements. 

The UNOHP realizes that there will be 
some researchers who prefer to take their 
oral history straight, without the editing that 
was necessary to produce this text; they are 
directed to the tape recording. Copies of all 
or part of this work and the tapes from which 
it is derived are available from: 

The University of Nevada 
Oral History Program 
Mailstop 0324 
University of Nevada-Reno 
89557 



Introduction 


“A sufficient measure of civilization is 
the influence of good women,” wrote Ralph 
Waldo Emerson in Society and Solitude. 
If Nevada’s civilization is measured by the 
influence Barbara Bennett has had, it will 
not come up wanting. However, but for the 
University of Nevada’s Oral History Program, 
Nevadans would have no way of knowing of 
this remarkable woman who has touched the 
lives of so many people in our state. 

This oral history of Barbara Bennett 
begins with a heartbreaking description of her 
early years in Oakland, California, and is truly 
a testament to the fact that despite poverty, 
ill-treatment and neglect, one can survive 
and become more resilient, independent and 
strong. She describes leaving home at the age 
of 13 and actually becoming self-supporting. 
She worked for caring people who insisted 
that she complete her education. For the first 
time in her life, she was able to socialize with 
her peers in school and participate in extra¬ 
curricular activities. 

Unfortunately, college plans didn’t work 
out because of World War II, and Barbara 


went to work in Bay Area defense plants. 
When the war ended she lost her job and her 
independence, like so many other women, to 
returning servicemen. She realized that it was 
a “man’s world” at that time. Barbara married 
John Bennett, a returning serviceman, and 
continued to live in Oakland. She and John 
started their family—two daughters and a 
son—and both held jobs in order to participate 
in the American Dream. Their family was first 
and foremost in her life, and no decisions 
affecting the family were made unilaterally. 

In 1964 the Bennetts moved to Reno, 
and Barbara went to work for the telephone 
company. While she scored well on company 
examinations, she was unsuccessful in getting 
promotions, and this experience, among 
others, led her to become interested in issues 
and causes. This was the period of time 
when affirmative action for minorities was 
beginning, but before people over 40 had 
started organizing over age-related injustices 
in the workplace. 

In 1970, armed with statistics proving 
discrimination, Barbara again applied for a 



XIV 


Barbara Bennett 


promotion, but to no avail. While she had what 
was probably a winning case of discrimination 
in court, she couldn’t afford to fight it, and she 
eventually left the telephone company She 
feels that since then the company has made 
strides in improving conditions for women in 
her age bracket; her determination and plain 
stubbornness helped bring about changes to 
benefit other people. 

This kind of injustice to herself and to 
others eventually led Barbara to become 
active in womens issues and ultimately to be 
instrumental in forming the Womens Political 
Caucus. And, of course, it was at this time 
that the Equal Rights Amendment was at the 
forefront of womens issues. The goal of the 
Womens Political Caucus was to secure good 
candidates, both male and female, who grasped 
the issues of women in the workplace and 
women in their homes. Several persons, both 
members and nonmembers of the Caucus, ran 
for office and won. Ultimately, through these 
efforts, the city of Reno and Washoe County 
not only had female members on the various 
boards, but eventually had several women city 
and county commissioners. 

Nevada’s racial minorities are another 
group whose lives have been touched because 
Barbara couldn’t stand the injustices meted out 
to them. She describes her feeling when the 
Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., was assassinated. 
Once more she marched on another cause 
and fought racial discrimination in housing, 
jobs and wherever it reared its bigoted head. 

In the early 1970s, the Bennetts moved 
from their house on Keystone Avenue into 
a mobile home. They wanted a home they 
could afford in retirement. Unfortunately, 
mobile home park landlords in Nevada 
became greedy, forcing some retirees out of 
their mobile homes because of “atrocious” 
increases in rates for space. This became 
another cause for Barbara; she founded the 


Nevada Mobile Homeowners Association, 
and through this group righted many of 
the wrongs. And here we have yet another 
segment of the population whose life was 
made better because of Barbara. 

By this time, she had attained the name 
recognition necessary to run for public office. 
Hers was a name not always popular with 
special interest groups, but she had a public 
profile. It was time to enter formal politics. 
She ran for county commissioner in 1975 and 
was defeated. In 1977, she ran for Reno City 
Council and lost again. But in 1979, she ran 
for mayor of Reno and won. 

Barbara was a formidable opponent at all 
times because she was so well prepared for the 
task at hand. She was honest and the people 
knew it; even her opponents acknowledged 
that she had no price tag. She opposed the 
enormous campaign contributions provided 
by special interest groups, and accepted none. 
She was truly “of the people.” 

In this oral memoir, Barbara Bennett 
provides, in great detail, a history of the 
problems Washoe County and Reno faced 
in the 1970s and early 1980s, and of the 
problems they still face. She is exceptionally 
candid in her descriptions of the people she 
encountered along the way and the people she 
worked with as an elected official. 

Barbara has long been affiliated with 
Common Cause, both locally and nationally, 
and has brought a lot of pride to members of 
the organization. (She has received formal 
recognition of her good work at both the local 
and national level.) However, Barbara recently 
lost her husband, John, and now has a less- 
than-active profile in the community. While 
she has certainly given more than her fair 
share, many people are urging her to become 
active again and run for political office. 

The last page of this oral history carries 
the advice that John and Barbara gave their 



Introduction 


xv 


children: “Your family is everything. You’ve 
got brothers and sisters in school. Look after 
them, because you’re going to have your 
family your whole life. It’s the only thing in 
your life that is going to be constant if you 
will let it be.” That was and is the credo of the 
Bennett family. In his 1820 sketch, “The Wife,” 
Washington Irving wrote: “There is in every 
true woman’s heart a spark of heavenly fire, 
which lies dormant in the broad daylight of 
prosperity but which kindles up and beams 
and blazes in the dark hour of adversity.” Mr. 
Irving must have known someone very much 
like Barbara when he was inspired to write 
those words. 

Leola H. Armstrong 
Common Cause 
March, 1989 




mu 



Barbara Bennett pictured in 1982 with Common Cause 
chairman Archibald Cox upon the occasion of receiving the 
Common Cause Public Service Achievement Award. 
Courtesy of Barbara Bennett Collection. 




















1 


Formative Years 


I was born in Oakland Califnornia, on 
July 25, 1923. On my paternal side of the 
family, the family name was Peters. Peters 
is not a Portuguese name, but they were 
Portuguese in descent. Apparently, the family 
name was changed, and I didn’t learn that 
until many years later. 

I do not know to this day what it was, 
and I haven’t really had enough interest to 
follow up and find out. I don’t know where 
my grandfather was born precisely—it 
could’ve been the Azores, or it could’ve been 
Portugal—but as a young man, be came to 
this country from the Azores and settled 
in Oakland. He was ultimately killed in an 
accident while working for the railroad. I 
was quite young at that time, so I remember 
very little about him, outside of his shocking 
white hair. I do not remember my paternal 
grandmother at all. I don’t know whether she 
came from the same part of the world as he, 
or whether he met her in Oakland. 

My maternal grandparents were both 
Irish. My grandfather’s name was Heffron. 


They came from Missouri, settled in California 
around what we now know as the Petaluma 
area, and did some farming. Ultimately they 
left some land to a school which I don’t believe 
operates any longer, but the land is now part 
of the public domain. I don’t think they were 
well-to-do then. Even if you gave a couple of 
acres of land for a public cause, you didn’t have 
to be wealthy to do so. In the 1940s and 1950s 
you could still buy land in the Sacramento 
area, the Bay Area, and throughout California 
for $10, $20 an acre. So their donation was not 
one given through wealth. Outside of wanting 
to provide a public service, I don’t understand 
why they gave the land. 

Both my parents were born in Oakland, 
I think...my father in 1898: I’m not sure how 
my mother’s family got from the Petaluma 
area over to Oakland. The details about my 
family are very sketchy, because I’m from a 
broken home. My mother was quite young 
when she married—she was 18. My father, I 
would guess, was six or seven years older at 
the time, but I’m not sure. My mother and 



2 


Barbara Bennett 


father were divorced when I was three years 
old, so when I was a young child I didn’t have 
that sense of family that a lot of people have. 
A lot of pieces have been put together in my 
head—some comes from talking to an aunt 
or other people in the past. But the facts are 
not as coherent or flowing as I would like 
them to be. 

During the Depression era, my father 
was a laundry truck driver. I suppose that 
was nothing to sneeze at in those days, 
because there were many people who had 
no employment at all. My mother was a 
homemaker. I was the second born. After I 
was born, my sister, Norma, was born in 1925. 
She still lives in San Francisco. We’re very 
cose, being the only siblings remaining in the 
family. My parents had a son who was born 
before me, who died of pneumonia at nine 
months of age. From what I’ve been able to put 
together from my mother’s sisters, my mother 
never adapted to the loss and apparently 
began to drink very heavily at that time. That 
is what ultimately brought about the divorce 
in the family. She never did recover, either, 
and she died very young in the county hospital 
in Alameda from the results of alcoholism. 

Surprisingly, I’ve been told that people 
don’t remember what happened to them when 
they were that young, but perhaps because 
things were rather traumatic, I do remember. 
I remember the divorce, and I remember that 
because my mother was drinking heavily, my 
father moved my sister and me all the way 
back to Buffalo, New York, for a period of 
time. I assume that either he did not want her 
to see us, or he was afraid she would come and 
take us, because he had been given custody of 
us in the divorce suit. 

I don’t remember who we stayed with 
in Buffalo, but it’s strange because I can still 
picture the house. I assume that it was perhaps 
a distant relative or someone on my father’s 


side, but I really do not know. I can remember 
the house very well, because I’d never been in 
snow. It was so cold! [laughs] 

I’ll never forget that we slept in a loft with 
other children, and I contracted scarlet fever. 
This was in the days prior to antibiotics, which 
makes it a very simple matter now. But it really 
could be a very fatal disease back at that time. 
As a matter of fact, I apparently had a very bad 
case of it, and one of the results of scarlet fever 
in those days was the loss of hair. Some people 
lost all their hair, which they never regained, 
and I was left with a number of scars on my 
head where the hair just fell out. 

Following that, somehow we came back to 
the Bay Area, and my sister and I were placed 
in an orphanage. I don’t remember the name, 
but it was in Oakland. I think we must have 
been there about a year and a half, because I 
had not started school yet. I don’t know why 
my father didn’t take us back, but he was a 
single man at that time...who knows? He 
probably had no way of caring for us. I guess 
in due time he made arrangements with a 
brother and sister-in-law of his in Oakland to 
take my sister and me in. We were there about 
a year and a half. I think that I was four-and- 
a-half years old and I did start school while 
we were with this aunt and uncle. They didn’t 
have any other children. 

I had appendicitis during that time, 
[laughs] I remember that I was on my way 
home from school and apparently it hit very 
sharply and almost burst, and I stopped on 
the sidewalk. In those days, neighbors knew 
everyone, so they saw me. They went for my 
aunt and they took me to the hospital, and 
out came the appendix. 

I really loved the time with my aunt and 
uncle. It was the first sense of family that I 
had ever really had. It’s the first Christmas 
that I remember clearly, because I spent it 
in the hospital, [laughs] It was beautiful.. I 



Formative Years 


3 


remember laughing about it because things 
were so silly. I guess I had a sense of adventure 
even then. There was a young girl about my 
age in the bed next to me who had been badly 
burned in an accident, and her legs were up 
to keep from touching, I guess. She dared me 
to get up and run to the end of the room. I 
suppose I couldn’t resist a challenge even then, 
so I did it, and it was just great fun. [laughs] 
On Christmas Eve, all the nurses went 
through the halls. All the lights were turned 
out and they carried candles and they sang 
all through the halls. We had our own tree 
in the room and it was my first memorable 
Christmas. I was six then. 

I was with my uncle and aunt from when 
I was four-and-a-half until I was seven. My 
Uncle Jack started me reading even before I 
had started school, and kept after me until I 
actually read him the Sunday morning comic 
strips. I had a good start in school, and it was 
good because I missed a lot of it at an earlier 
time. I always liked school—loved it from 
day one. 

At seven years of age all of us at home— 
my sister, aunt, uncle and I—had all been 
expecting my father to marry a woman that 
we knew he’d seen for quite a period of time. 
All of a sudden, he surprised everyone and 
up and married a woman that no one had 
ever heard of. So there was another whole 
family thing there, [laughs] It came as a 
shock to everyone. I can’t recall my thought 
processes at the time, but I would assume that 
because we all liked the other woman so well, 
that our future stepmother had this sort of 
unfavorable ranking in my opinion right from 
the beginning. At any rate, they were married 
when I was seven years of age. She had her 
own home in Oakland; she was divorced and 
Italian, but she was not active in the Catholic 
church. So then we went back and lived with 
my father and his new wife. 


In rationalizing this as time passed 
and I got older, I think that I’d reached 
the conclusion that at that time my father 
just wanted a home for us. Maybe he felt 
this woman owning her own home would 
provide a home for us, and perhaps this other 
woman in his life could not offer this. But it 
was disastrous from the beginning. She had 
two sons who were considerably older than 
us. The youngest was about four years my 
senior, and the older was probably ten years 
my senior. 

At that point in time, my father drifted 
somewhat away from the church, in spite of 
my having been baptized a Catholic. Perhaps 
this was because there was the divorce and 
things, I don’t know. He became very active 
in the Masonic Order. He was still driving the 
laundry truck then. But it seemed like countless 
hours committed to the Masonic Order. 

Our father spent very little time at home, 
and we were left with a stepmother who had 
become progressively more vicious. Norma 
and I both put up with being called stupid. My 
stepmother also used to beat us. The washers 
of those days were in the basement, and they 
had the hand-wringers on them. You lifted 
clothes out by hand and put them through 
these wringers. The water was real hot, so 
there was a very bard oak stick with about a 
two-inch circumference that was used to lift 
out the clothing. That stick seemed to be her 
favorite weapon. 

It sounds so strange, because this kind 
of thing was not discussed back then. But 
now, because there is so much abuse going 
on out there, people are talking about it, and 
I feel free to talk about it. We were abused 
physically, but mainly emotionally, which 
had different effects on my sister and myself. 
Norma took years and years...she never really 
got over it until maybe ten years ago, which 
is a very long period of time. She had what 



4 


Barbara Bennett 


they used to call a nervous breakdown. She 
went through all of that and really had a 
very difficult time. These things affected her 
differently than they affected me. They made 
me stubborn and hard-headed...they really 
did. They toughened me. 

We didn’t dare tell my father about our 
stepmother abusing us, because we figured 
that would make things worse. I had always 
been so crazy about my father, but during 
this period of time he couldn’t see the things 
that were happening, and if he did, he didn’t 
seem to care enough to do anything about 
it. You couldn’t miss some of the knots and 
lumps and things that appeared on us, but 
we didn’t dare say anything. I had friends in 
school, but I never told anyone about anything 
because I was ashamed. You just don’t discuss 
these things and you go to extremes to hide 
bruises...it’s so weird. 

As far as my aunt and uncle were 
concerned, when my father married this 
woman, all ties with both my maternal and 
paternal families were cut. I don’t know the 
reason why—I don’t know whether my father 
cut it off or whether his wife made it obvious 
that they were unwelcome. I know that as 
time went on, it was very obvious that they 
were entirely unwelcome. So all connections 
with aunts and uncles on both sides of the 
family—cousins, grandparents, everyone— 
were just severed. No one really knew what 
was going on. In later years I talked with my 
grandmother and an aunt that had tried to 
come to the house and visit. They said that 
every time they called or tried to see us, 
we were never told. We just felt we’d been 
deserted, and then found out later that that 
wasn’t true. We were also told that they had 
brought Christmas gifts, which we never saw, 
so we don’t know what happened to them. 

I became more and more attached to 
school because it was almost an escape for me 


at that point in time. I’d always loved athletics, 
and fortunately had a very natural flair for it, 
too. I wanted very much to take part in a lot 
of these activities at school, but we absolutely 
could not. Our stepmother wouldn’t let us, 
and that showed just how petty things can 
be. There were always field trips in school, 
and students would go to the local dairies and 
bakeries, and that sort of thing. Whenever one 
of those field trips was due, we had to get a 
note from our parents approving them, and 
I never got one approved. She refused it, and 
my father never even knew about it. I don’t 
know why she wouldn’t let us go. We were 
also not entitled to have any friends to the 
home..I never had a friend in the house. We 
were never allowed to go to a party and never 
allowed to stay for after-school activities. It 
was just awful.. 

I don’t know if my father and his wife 
got along, because I hardly remember him 
ever being at home—he was just gone all the 
time. My sister and I were very, very close, 
because we only had each other. People talk 
about the old, mean stepmother. I mean she 
was an absolute bitch! She really was. But we 
were instructed to call her Mother. We were 
told that that was what she was to be called. 

Our clothes were hand-me-downs, which 
was not unusual for any family, because 
this was during the Depression. I know my 
husband has said how he was embarrassed 
to wear hand-me-down clothing, but I didn’t 
know anything else...what difference did it 
make? It was something to wear, [laughs] 

Once in junior high school some of the 
girls in the class were having a party—I think 
it was a birthday party—and I really wanted 
to go. I hadn’t been allowed to do that sort of 
thing. I asked if I could go, and the answer 
was no, but fate intervened. Right next door 
to where we lived, a sister of my stepmother 
lived. I got along with her very well—they 



Formative Years 


5 


raised chow dogs. As often happened, I would 
go over to this womans house and sit with 
their dogs if they were going away, because 
the dogs required special feedings. It worked 
out because I had to go take care of the dogs 
on the same night the party was being held. 
Well, I sneaked out and off I went to the party, 
[laughs] My sister was with me and she went, 
too. During the party there was a spelling 
contest, which I won, and I got a quarter. It 
was a lot of money when you never had an 
allowance...it was a ton of money. 

When we went to go home, we rounded 
a corner about two blocks from the house 
and we could see flashing lights. They had 
discovered, obviously, that we were missing 
and had called the police. My sister decided to 
go on and go home, and I told her to do what 
she wanted, but I decided this was a good time 
for me to leave, [laughs] Norma went straight 
up that street. I went around the block in the 
back, over a fence and down in the basement, 
and got a jacket and a change of clothes, and 
off I went. 

I went no place in particular. Here I had 
this quarter in my pocket, and I was absolutely 
rich, [laughs] It was about 9:00 at night by 
then. I took a dime, I think, and went to a 
movie. I walked about two miles to town to 
a movie and stayed until the theater closed. 
Then I left and I didn’t know what I was going 
to do. My father had a brother that lived sort 
of halfway between where we lived and where 
downtown was. (He wasn’t the same uncle we 
had lived with.) I started to go to their place, 
but I knew if I went there they would call my 
father, and I would have to go home. So I 
changed my mind when I just about got there 
and I just wandered around the neighborhood 
for some place to lie down. I found a place in 
someone’s backyard on one of those swings 
that go back and forth. I just crawled on the 
swing and went to sleep. 


I woke up early the next morning and 
took off again. There is a famous large park, 
Lake Merritt, in Oakland. The weather was 
warm, and I went over to the park and I just 
spent the day gallivanting. I was really getting 
hungry by this time. Some of the picnics and 
things began to break up, and when I saw 
people throw something away, I went and got 
it. That’s how I ate. 

That day I took another of my dimes and 
went back and spent the day in the show again. 
By then I was really getting hungry.... At any 
rate I managed to get enough in me to survive. 
I was down to a nickel and bought two candy 
bars with that. But by the end of that day things 
were looking pretty bleak. I was afraid to go 
back and sleep in the same place again, so I 
went to the police station, walked in and told 
a policeman who I was. The policeman said, 
“Yes,” as though he were saying, “So?...” I told 
him I had run away, and I was so hungry. 

It was real adult jail, and so they took me 
into this cell and locked me up. They were 
very nice. Anyway, they brought me in a cup 
of coffee and the hardest danish that you’d 
ever eaten in your life. But I must have just 
absolutely wolfed it down. When my father 
and stepmother came to get me, she said she 
knew I’d been staying with someone, but the 
policeman said, “She was very hungry when 
she got here, so we don’t think that she’s been 
with anyone.” 

We left, and it was back home again to 
some of the same things. But I had developed 
a certain amount of independence during this 
journey, and I knew that I was not going to 
be staying there very long. In fact, I left there 
for good when I was 13 years of age. When I 
ran away, I know it scared Norma, but I really 
couldn’t stay...I really just couldn’t tolerate it. 
I was the only one that was really taking the 
physical beatings at that point in time, but I 
wouldn’t cry. 



6 


Barbara Bennett 


What I did when I left home at 13 was to go 
to the newspaper ads and find a job, so I wasn’t 
just running foolishly by then. I knew that if 
I was going to stay gone that I had to have 
a way to survive. In the newspaper I found 
an opening where they wanted someone to 
look after children, clean house, and live in. 
It suited me absolutely perfectly...$8 a month 
and room and board. I didn’t tell my father 
and stepmother—I just left. I told the people 
that were hiring me why I wanted the job and 
said I absolutely would not go home. I had 
them contact my father, and he came over and 
agreed to let me stay. He knew by then that I 
was very serious. I stayed there and went to 
school a couple of years, worked for them, and 
took care of the children. The family had two 
children, and the father was in the insurance 
business. The wife was very active in civic 
affairs. They really took an interest in me. 
Here I was on my own... lots of weird things 
could have happened. 

I had my days off and I spent them 
with the two girls that I was friends with in 
school. I spent a lot of time with the family 
of a friend who died recently. Her name 
was Margaret. Margaret didn’t have a father. 
There was a mother, a grandmother and an 
aunt all living in the same house with her, 
and they sort of took me in. I was either at 
their home, or back where I lived with the 
family whose children I watched. This was 
clear on the other end of town from where 
my father lived. 

I don’t know how many miles I walked... it 
had to be at least three or four miles to high 
school because I could only afford a ticket for 
bus fare one way. So I was up very early in the 
morning and walked to school. They made 
sure that I went to school, and they saw my 
report cards and signed them and followed up 
on things. They exerted some discipline when 
it was necessary, and some reasoning—a great 


deal of that. They were very influential in my 
life at that time. 

By then I was in Technical High in 
Oakland, and I had never told the teachers 
about my situation. But I think my friend, 
Margaret, had told them of my situation— 
how I got in it. Then they began to take an 
interest in me. When I was about eight or 
nine years old, my front tooth had broken off, 
and it was a permanent tooth. By the time I 
was in high school, it had turned black, and 
it made me very self-conscious. I was always 
smiling in a rather strange way, and this gym 
teacher took an interest in me and sent me to 
her dentist to have it fixed. She strongly urged 
me to keep up my grades and go to college. I 
really wanted to do just that. 

When I was 17,1 took another job working 
for a different family in Oakland. The father 
was a doctor. Usually no one hired kids until 
they were 18—I suppose it was a hangover 
from the Depression. I stayed with them until 
I was all through high school. 

After I had left home and was on my 
own, I was able to stay and take part in a lot 
of after-school activities. I was a cheerleader 
for the Girls’ Athletic Association for some 
time, and in my final year I was president of 
that group. We had a large “conference” of 
all the Girls’ Athletic Association’s schools in 
the Oakland area, and that was my first real 
experience before a large group. We just had 
a wonderful time. I was active in just about 
all kinds of sports. 

Because I had wanted to go to college, 
obviously I had to take what were then called 
college-prep courses, so I took all the required 
subjects in science, language, math, and 
English. I was a good student, but nothing 
outstanding. But the freedom that I was 
enjoying at that point in time didn’t permit 
me to put all the time in studying that I should 
have, [laughs] I was enjoying this freedom for 



Formative Years 


7 


the first time in my life. Free time was not a 
problem, even though I was working for that 
family. I looked after the children, cleaned, 
and did laundry. I didn’t do all these things 
alone—the wife in the family was a part of 
this, too. In a way I was like a big sister to 
the children. I took a shine to cooking early 
on...I’ve always loved to cook. 

I had really wanted to go to Cal [University 
of California-Berkeley], but I knew it was out 
of the question from the standpoint of cost. 
So I planned to go to San Francisco State. The 
teacher who befriended me in high school 
graduated there. She was something of a 
heroine to me. I thought it was a pretty good 
idea, so I moved over to San Francisco and I 
applied for work at the telephone company. 
They wouldn’t hire me until I turned 18, but 
I took the tests and everything. 

I was still only making about $30 a month 
working for a doctor’s family, and I never felt 
any sense of closeness with them, so I kept 
looking for another job. I found one working 
for the Jantzen bathing suit company in San 
Francisco in the stockroom. I stayed there 
until I was 18, then I went to the telephone 
company and went to work for them. 

Due to the influence of this very 
marvelous woman who was the teacher I 
mentioned, I thought I’d like to be a teacher. I 
thought I wanted to teach physical education, 
mainly. Back then you didn’t have to have 
two majors—you could be just a physical 
education teacher. The other thing I had been 
active in was public speaking classes. That 
teacher urged me to go into law, which was 
sort of in the back of my head, but I knew it 
wasn’t possible. I was going to be lucky if I 
made it to college. 

I had planned to go to college, but then the 
war broke out in December of 1941, the year I 
graduated from high school, and that changed 
everything. There was never any question in 


the minds of all of us at that time: everyone 
wanted to do their part in the war effort. The 
men were all being taken, and there were 
a lot of things where women were needed 
to do men’s jobs. I could not see sitting at a 
switchboard when there were other women 
who could do that, so I went to work in what 
we now call the defense industry. 

I had worked at the telephone company 
for a few months, until the war broke out. I 
spent the rest of the war working in defense 
plants. I worked for the navy for a while, 
out at Hunter’s Point, and then back at the 
shipyards in Oakland. I did what we used to 
call bucking rivets—like Rosie the Riveter. We 
would buck rivets, and we ultimately did some 
warehousing at the shipyard. I was active and 
very strong. They had a lot of women doing 
the heavy lifting and the driving of trucks, so 
I did a lot of different things at that time. I was 
making good money and I enjoyed it! I was 
living by myself then in Oakland. 

During this time, Norma stayed at home 
with my father and stepmother. Apparently, 
after I left, my father began to put two-and- 
two together, so Norma has often told me that 
she didn’t have as much trouble. She thought 
that that was the reason for it. She stayed at 
home until she was about 16,1 think. Norma 
was not one to just take off and go, but she did 
run away. When they took her back, she told 
them that she didn’t want to stay there, so they 
placed her in a foster home in Alameda. She 
stayed there until she got out of high school 
and married. We were seeing each other quite 
a bit by then. As a matter of fact, when she 
turned 18, she too moved to San Francisco 
so we’d be closer together. 




2 

Marriage, Family, and Employment 


After I finished working in the war 
industry when the war ended, I met John 
Bennett. I met him in Oakland through 
some mutual friends. He was my first serious 
male interest. John was born in Canada, but 
moved to Oakland when he was six years of 
age. His family was far more normal than 
mine. He had two sisters and two brothers. 
His mother and father were divorced, and the 
father raised the children in that family. That 
was really in the midst of the Depression, and 
trying to raise five kids.... I was very close to 
John’s father, and still am close to his family. 
I had no “mother-in-law problem.” [laughs] 
Shed have to be awful bad, because I love my 
brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law—they’re 
all neat people. We used to have a great time. 

John had been in the navy all during the 
war, but he was out of the service when I met 
him. He had been able to send some money 
home to help. He was working in Oakland 
and worked at a number of different things. 
He did some selling for a tire company for a 
while—it was really hard work. 


John had been active in a union, and he 
had an uncle that was very active in the union 
at that time, so John has always had a special 
place in his heart for unions. I have, too, for 
that matter. I recognize that there is good and 
evil in them today, but I think it’s important 
for people to understand that they would not 
be earning the wages, have the job and safety 
protections, or be living in the homes and 
driving the cars if unions had not brought 
about decent working conditions and wages. 
I think that the working men and women of 
this country had ought to always be grateful 
for that. 

I didn’t belong to a union when I was 
working in the war industry because I think 
they waived a lot of the requirements back 
then—they knew that it was temporary. As 
a mailer of fact, most of the men that went 
into the service maintained their union dues. 
I don’t know whether they paid them or 
whether they were just carried on the books 
or what. But of course when the war ended, 
there was no longer any place for women like 



10 


Barbara Bennett 


myself who had done a lot of the men’s work. 
This was traumatic in a lot of ways, because 
a lot of women had come to depend on the 
money they had been earning to provide 
some independence in their life. Then they 
found that the jobs had to be turned back to 
the servicemen who were returning. We all 
understood that, but felt that there should be 
room for all of us, and there wasn’t. Ultimately, 
that’s one of the things that led me to be active 
in forming the Women’s Political Caucus. It 
also fueled my being active in attempts to 
ratify the Equal Rights Amendment. I felt that 
women ought to be the masters of their own 
destiny—we should not have the government 
and business telling us that we cannot do 
those kinds of things because we’re women, 
especially since we’ve proven we can do them. 

After the war John and I married, and then 
I didn’t work. When we were first married, we 
lived in Oakland. We started a family, and we 
ultimately had three children—two daughters 
and a son. I did go back to work in time. I 
guess I was a real pushy broad, [laughs] 

I think that having grown up in poverty 
and during the Depression, there were a lot 
of things that I wanted in life. I didn’t want to 
be working for someone else, and I had all of 
these ambitions. I wanted everything that life 
could offer. I’d worked for people that had the 
Cadillacs in the garages, and their swimming 
pools, and their beautiful homes...what we call 
the “American Dream.” It was what I wanted, 
so I was willing to work. John was always 
very good in that respect, too. We worked to 
get there. 

Because my childhood was so unnatural, 
I had special feelings about having a family 
and being a mother. I guess that I was perhaps 
too easy a parent I guess even my kids thought 
that I could’ve been a more firm parent. They 
got away with a lot of things that they felt they 
shouldn’t have. I never physically punished 


the children— never. I would not lay a hand on 
them, and I was very adamant about that. I just 
didn’t think that was a way to bring them up. 
I really did enjoy the children, but there were 
things that were missing, too. Never having 
had this home life as a child, you’re not sure 
what to do with children and how to take care 
of them. But when you live in a neighborhood, 
neighbors learn from one another. There was 
a woman next door who had three children 
at the time, and another across the street who 
had two older children. So there was someone 
that you could go to for advice and learn what 
you’re supposed to be and do as a mother. I’m 
still very close to my children. 

We weren’t well off when we were first 
married. It was a matter of two people working 
hard to get the things that we wanted. I didn’t 
go back to work until right after Linda was 
born. She’s the youngest. I went to work for 
the government at that time. The job wasn’t 
anything that I wanted to stay with, and John 
in the meanwhile had advanced. He went 
to work for the government and became an 
electronics equipment inspector. There was 
some advantage to working for the government 
in those days for servicemen, because they got 
to keep some of the seniority, and he advanced 
nicely. Ultimately John decided that he just 
didn’t want to work for the government, so 
he quit—not just like that, though, because 
he had a family. We talked about it for some 
period of time. We decided it was time to make 
some changes, and we came to Reno. John had 
a brother in Reno who was in the plumbing 
business, and he had offered John a job as an 
expediter. That’s how we came to Reno. I wasn’t 
employed, so I didn’t leave behind a job, but I 
did seek employment went I got to Reno. That 
was in 1964. We bought a home on Keystone 
Avenue on the fourteen hundred block, as I 
recall. The kids were in high school at that 
time, so they went to Reno High. 



Marriage, Family, and Employment 


11 


I think we had been to Reno twice in the 
past. Most everyone in California comes up 
just to have some fun. We didn’t really know 
anything about Reno, and the change was 
difficult for us. That was because our children 
had to change schools. If you take children 
out of school at that age, it’s a tough move 
for them...it was traumatic. We both left our 
families, with the exception of John’s brother, 
Tom, and his wife, who lived in Reno. So it 
was a difficult move. I didn’t fall in love with 
Reno overnight for those reasons, but it didn’t 
take me long to learn. 

I liked Reno because it was a small-town 
atmosphere, and it was easy to get acquainted 
with others. It was easy for the kids to make 
friends, once they made up their minds that 
they would. I think that those were some of 
the bonuses of moving. 

I went to work for the telephone company 
in Reno in 1964. In 1965 I had a heart attack, 
which resolved any lingering ambitions that 
I had as far as “ladder-climbing.” You really 
stop and take a look and decide where you 
want to go, what you want to do, whether your 
values are as they should be.... I did a lot of 
that at that time. 

We’d been through a lot of stress, and 
I’d always been a smoker, so I’m sure that 
that was a part of it. I had the heart attack 
at home. I’d gone into the hospital because 
our older daughter, Sherry, then was out of 
high school—she’d gone to work for Washoe 
Medical Center as an EEC technician. My 
knee popped up—really swelled—one day, 
and she said I should see a doctor. I just felt 
kind of icky and really lousy. But I’d gone 
on to work and then got to feeling worse 
and worse on this particular Thursday. 
So Sherry talked me into checking into 
the hospital. The doctors checked me out 
through Thursday and Friday, did EKGs, and 
couldn’t find anything wrong. I’ve learned 


since that time that an EKG doesn’t show 
much of anything. 

They released me on Saturday, and Sunday 
morning I had a myocardial infarction. I had 
a bad one, a very strong heart attack. I knew 
I was having a heart attack. The pain was 
oppressive, like a boulder on my chest. My 
arm felt like it had been clamped off—it was 
like someone was just pulling. I had walked 
down to the Eagle Thrifty store on Keystone 
and West Seventh to pick up the Sunday 
paper. Sherry showed up later because I hadn’t 
come back. I guess when I didn’t come back 
right away, she went down and found me. I 
just sat there, she ran back and got John and 
called the doctor. I described my symptoms 
to her and she relayed them very accurately to 
the doctor. He did not believe it was anything 
serious, ordered a pain medication sent to the 
house, and said I should come into the office 
in the morning. 

At that time, I guess Reno was still so small 
that we didn’t have a cardiologist—internists 
took care of those things. I’ve never gotten 
over this, because it made me more and more 
furious with the way women were treated. The 
doctor who had had me in the hospital prior 
to the heart attack said, “Oh, well.” 

When they released me from the hospital, 
they told me at that time, “Women your age 
do not have heart attacks.” He told me that 
and I believed it! The next morning we went 
to the office and they hooked me up to the 
EKG. I could see it running off the machine, 
and whereas there are normally sharp points 
on an EKG pattern, this was sort of like 
low-sloping mountains with rolling lines 
on it—no sharp points. The nurse who was 
doing the testing on me shut the machine 
off immediately and went running for the 
doctor. And, of course, he sent me over to 
the hospital then in a wheelchair. I have to 
believe that he was wondering whether they 



12 


Barbara Bennett 


were going to get sued. I never thought of it 
at the time. I’ve never sued anyone in my life, 
but that was a very life-threatening situation 
and was an extremely poor decision that the 
doctor had made. 

I spent about three weeks in the hospital; 
they didn’t have the equipment or technology 
that they do today. It’s surprising how much 
progress has been made in the last 22 or 23 
years. But in 1965 they didn’t even have really 
good monitoring machines in the hospitals. 
At any rate, I spent three weeks in the hospital 
and another three months recovering at home 
before they let me go back to work, which they 
don’t do any longer. I think they feel you’re 
better off moving around soon and trying to 
get back into your normal pattern. 

The first time you have problems with a 
heart, I think that you change some of your 
style of living. I think that a heart attack has a 
distinct impact on the value system. It compels 
you to get into things that maybe you’ve been 
delaying because you thought you were too 
busy. You pay more attention to what’s going 
on in the world and start getting involved. 

Following the heart attack, I really didn’t 
do a lot of anything, because I had a recovery 
period and we had three teenage kids. Then 
when the money got tight, I returned to work 
for the telephone company. I had gone to work 
for the telephone company before the heart 
attack in 1964. Then when I had the heart 
attack, I was on disability, some of which was 
paid. When that time ran out, my job was 
still there for me. I was a good employee. I 
was conscientious; things came easily to me; 
I learned quickly; and I showed up when I 
was supposed to. I think that they’re more 
patient with good employees than they are 
otherwise—I think any company is. 

I went to work at the phone company as 
an information operator. If someone called in 
and wanted a number, you looked it up. This 


was before all of the new changes came in; 
it’s now done by computer. I spent five years 
as an operator and then transferred over to 
what they call the traffic offices, where we 
worked budgets and schedules, and where 
the insurance and time records were kept. It 
was sort of a secretarial-bookkeeping-budget 
analysis job. It was interesting work and I 
enjoyed it. I also worked as an assistant traffic 
operating manager, which is quite a jump 
from other clerical work or from being an 
operator. I worked in that department as a 
substitute for some time. This was about 1970. 

I was 40 years old when I went to the 
telephone company, and it was unusual for 
them to hire someone at that age. Promotions 
simply were not going to older women. By that 
time I’d been there five years, so I was 45. I 
found myself in a position of training much 
younger women who would be promoted. You 
hear of this often, even today. I took the FAR- 
Personnel Advanced Review tests, I believe 
it is—and scored extremely well. Still, I was 
seeing all these young kids getting promoted. 
It began to bother me a lot, because by then 
I was also involved in other women’s issues, 
though the women’s movement had not really 
impacted Reno as it had elsewhere in the 
country. I really was very angry. 

The minority issue, which I still often think 
about, was also coming into play along with the 
problems with women’s issues. The telephone 
company had developed a policy wherein 
they had to advance so many minorities, and 
they were good about it. Minorities included 
Hispanics, blacks, and Asians. But the one that 
really threw me was that it meant Basques. 
How it got to that, I don’t know. In fact, I 
recently read an interesting story in Time 
magazine discussing how they’re bringing all 
these different elements of society into the 
Affirmative Action programs with very little 
proof that they’re minorities. 



Marriage, Family, and Employment 


13 


Between my age and the policy of 
promoting minorities at that time, I was 
really kind of locked in at the telephone 
company The minority thing didn’t bother 
me because as part of the Nevada Women’s 
Political Caucus, we were working with 
those kinds of things. I was fully aware that 
people who have a lot of seniority and a lot 
of time in sometimes don’t get promoted. The 
purpose for that policy, in my opinion, was 
to open doors that had been dosed to those 
people for all those years. And the doors had 
to open—that’s all there was to it. They still 
do, for that matter. 

I’d applied for a job in engineering, which 
would have been a substantial upgrade, and 
lost it to a young Hispanic woman, and I did 
not complain about it. However, the company 
policy of continuing to promote on the basis 
of youth was making me more irate all the 
time. I wasn’t sure how far the laws went in 
prohibiting discrimination on the basis of age, 
but I felt that they went far enough where a 
clear pattern could be seen at the telephone 
company. I happened to be in a position where 
I could accumulate statistics—I knew when 
people came to work and I knew their ages, 
so it was simply a matter of putting numbers 
together. When I did, it was even worse than 
I thought it was. 

When I still could not advance in the 
traffic department, I asked for a transfer 
into another department. At that time I was 
seriously considering leaving, but I wanted 
to get my 10 years in, because they had just 
passed a new federal law dealing with vested 
pensions after 10 years of service. I figured, 
“All right. I’m going to stay until I get my 10 
years.” However, it turned out—unbeknownst 
to me at the time—that the law only applies 
when you contribute to a pension system. At 
that time, the telephone company paid the 
entire amount of the pension. So I spent a 


couple of years more there than I would have 
normally, and the promotional policies there 
on the basis of age were no better than they’d 
been in the traffic department. 

I decided to resign, and I wrote a very 
scathing letter to the head of the telephone 
company in Nevada, pointing out my reasons 
for it and citing statistics. By then I had 
talked to an attorney who had spent some 
time here in Reno and had gone down to San 
Francisco to open an affirmative action-equal 
opportunity legal office. I contacted her and 
sent her the information. As a matter of fact, 
I sent her an exact copy of the letter that I’d 
sent to management. She felt that I had a 
case, but she was so bogged down that she 
couldn’t take it. As a mailer of fact, she could 
only recommend one attorney at the time 
that she felt even had enough background in 
it to take it on. But we were not in a position 
to hire an attorney. 

So I wrote a letter to the phone company 
and told them that I had been advised that I 
probably had a very strong case, but could not 
afford to pursue it. I felt that they ought to look 
to their policies and do something about them, 
and they have over time. I can’t say that that 
was the sole reason, but I do believe that it was 
certainly an impetus towards some changes 
that took place in the telephone company. 

I didn’t exactly get a direct response from 
the telephone company when I wrote the 
letter. The executive secretary to the head of 
the telephone company here in Nevada at that 
time also happened to be a personal friend 
of mine whom I knew outside the telephone 
company. Apparently, the boss found out 
about it and sent her to talk to me. Of course, I 
pulled no punches again. I said, “You have my 
reasons. They’re valid.” My letter was a letter 
of resignation, and I left on that note—that 
was in 1975. 




3 


Becoming a Political Activist 


My interest in politics started when I was 
in junior high school, because that was at the 
time when Franklin Roosevelt ran against 
Alf Landau. We conducted our own little 
campaigns and cast our “straw votes.” We 
campaigned and argued among ourselves, and 
made fun of the other persons candidate, as 
kids are wont to do. I was always a Democrat. 
My father was one, too. 

I remember one night John and I went to 
dinner with his brother, Tom, and his wife. I 
was interested in politics even then, around 
1965. I guess Tom’s wife asked me if I knew 
who our senators were, I did know some, but 
not all of them. So I soon got their names 
and began to read local papers. I was not 
involved in politics in California—I was too 
busy with three children, [laughs] We had 
had all of them in a four-year period of time, 
so there wasn’t a lot of time for that sort of 
thing. But I did follow things. I knew who 
the mayors, congressmen, senators, and city 
council people were, so I followed the issues. 
I was not actively involved, but I was involved 


emotionally and kept track of things that were 
going on. 

I had always been anxious to study law, 
but my only opportunity was to take an 
extension course. From 1967 to 19711 studied 
law through an extension course offered by La 
Salle Extension University out of Chicago. It 
was a widely accepted, good course, although 
home study is not the kind of thing that 
prepares you to be a lawyer in a court of law, 
in my opinion. You don’t get access to that 
kind of training. You’re strictly reading out 
of books and taking tests. But it provided a 
very substantial background in business and 
corporate law. As a matter of fact, I never 
thought that I would have an interest in 
corporate law, and so when my highest grades 
came out of that, I had to tell you I was pretty 
disappointed, [laughs] I hoped they would be 
in some other area of law, but knowledge of 
corporate law is advantageous in dealing with 
contracts and business. Later at city hall it was 
certainly an advantage in reading contracts 



16 


Barbara Bennett 


and dealing with ordinances, and it has been 
something that has been very useful in my life. 

I became interested in many issues when 
Martin Luther King was assassinated in 1968. 
I stopped into a small neighborhood grocery 
store, and the news of his death hadn’t been 
on the air too long. I had stopped to get a 
package of gum on my way to work. When 
I went to pay for it, there was a customer in 
there talking to the man who owned the store. 
They were talking about the Martin Luther 
King assassination. They said, “It’s about 
time somebody got that bastard.” That did it! 
I knew if I opened my mouth that I was just 
going to be in terrible trouble. So I threw the 
gum down on the counter and left. That just 
stuck with me. 

I contacted Eddie Scott, who ran the Race 
Relations Center at that time. I don’t know 
where I learned about him, whether I had read 
something in the paper or what, but that’s how 
I really began to get involved in things in Reno. 
I worked with Eddie on housing problems and 
in other things. Eddie is quite a character, but 
he was committed to the things he believed 
in. No one in the black community—like the 
women—had ever spoken out about their 
concerns and about what was happening to 
them in the community. Therefore, I enjoyed 
working with Eddie. 

One of the major issues I worked on with 
the Race Relations Center was fair housing 
for blacks. That was a serious issue. I’d go out 
and apply for an apartment all by myself and 
the landlord would be willing to rent it to me. 
Then if a black member of the group were to 
go with me, he would be told there was no 
vacancy. Or if he went alone, there would be 
no vacancy. It’s tragic that you have to stoop 
to some so-called underhanded tactics, but 
if you want to prove a point, at times it’s 
necessary to do that—it really is. 


The main problems that we were looking 
at as far as discrimination was concerned were 
those that dealt with the black population in 
the area. If I remember right, there was no 
black professor at the university at that time. 
There may have been one, but that would still 
have been disgraceful, and there were not a 
lot of black teachers in the schools. 

Through the Race Relations Center I met 
other women who were involved: I met Maya 
Miller and Nancy Gomes. Those women were 
the two major impacts who were also working 
with Eddie. Through them we got in one thing 
after another. Maya had always been involved 
in this sort of thing and so had Nancy. I 
suppose you could say they sort of took me 
under their wing. When I realized how much 
I had been missing, how little I knew about 
these kinds of things, and how much I could 
learn from people like that, it really took a lot 
of my thought processes and kept me busy. 
Despite the fact that I was working, we went 
on to a lot of things. We started the Nevada 
Women’s Political Caucus as a result. 

Nancy ran for the school board, and I 
worked with that and began to get involved 
in some of the other campaigns, like for Mary 
Frazzini. I was also a member of the Business 
and Professional Women (BPW) at that 
time. That was howl met Mary Frazzini and 
Marge DeCosta, who later worked with me in 
founding the Women’s Political Caucus along 
with Maya and Nancy. The BPW had access 
to names of other clubs throughout the state, 
so I got in and sent letters out to those people, 
letting them know that we were here. We 
were not successful in getting clubs outside 
of Reno or our immediate area, because I was 
working full-time. Just getting Reno going was 
a substantial challenge at that time. 

I don’t belong to the BFW now, and 
perhaps some of their aims have changed. They 
probably set out to be a social organization 



Becoming a Political Activist 


17 


to bring working and professional women 
together to learn from one another, but early 
on they also began to address some of the 
issues involving working women. I shall not 
forget one night when the BPW honored me 
as one of the women of the year. The speaker 
was Betty Stoddard, who now does ads for 
Carpeteria in Reno. Anyway, here she was 
in front of this group of informed, caring 
women, and she told them that a woman 
should never be president because during 
“that time of the month,” they were just too 
unpredictable, [laughs] 

We really developed a tremendous initial 
northern Nevada Women’s Political Caucus. 
Mary Frazzini was a Republican, so it was a 
bipartisan kind of thing. We worked hard to 
keep it that, and we did have a substantial 
number. Sue Wagner, who is also a Republican, 
came in in time. Our main thrust at that time 
was to get some parity in elective offices in this 
state. Up until then, we’d never had a woman 
on the Reno City Council; never had one on 
the County Commission; never had one in 
Spark. And only about five percent of the 
legislature were female. Most of those women, 
I’m sorry to say, were the kinds of women who 
were uncomfortable with a women’s political 
movement—like Helen Hen. They fit into this 
male-dominated society because they didn’t 
rock any boats. 

Our first major chore-outside of 
organizing, getting members, getting the 
word out in the community, doing newspaper 
pieces and stories on the radio when the 
opportunity presented itself—was we wanted 
to establish a City of Reno Commission on the 
Status of Women. Sam Dibitonto was mayor 
at that time. I went to Sam and he was only 
too happy to start it. He has two daughters 
and a wife. He said he was surrounded by 
women, and he would be happy to get us a 


women’s political caucus. And we did. So we 
had the Reno Commission on the Status of 
Women going, which began to get into issues 
in Reno. Then there was also the Caucus, 
which attempted to encourage, find, and 
train women to run for office and work for 
the Equal Rights Amendment. 

One of the other things that we dealt with 
at that time was our attempt to attract men 
who were of a like mind into the Women’s 
Political Caucus. We did have a fair number 
of those. I know that Dennis Myers was an 
early member, as was Ken Hailer. I think Jim 
Kosinski was an early member; there were 
some others, too. We also began to get into 
the university and attracted some university 
women. The university women at that time 
were talking about the fact that athletics for 
women certainly were not only under-funded, 
but they simply weren’t funded at all. 

We really had our hands full with training 
people to work in political races. We trained 
people to do that so that they could get out 
and be active. From that effort came hundreds 
of women who worked for both men and 
women candidates. 

At that time, there was an antagonism 
towards women’s groups of this kind, and 
Reno certainly was guilty of a bit of that. 
Here I’d been married for about 30 years at 
the time, and Sue was married, and Nancy 
was married. We also had women who were 
divorced, those that had never been married, 
and some that were too young to even be 
considering it. I felt it was very important to 
push aside this bra-burning image—it was 
so phony to begin with—but once that sort 
of thing hits the media, it just grows into a 
huge fireball. Unfortunately, I thought that, 
in a sense, we had to demean ourselves a bit 
in order to say, “Look, here’s a picture of me. 
I’m shopping in a grocery store, I’ve got kids, 
and I’m married.” I shouldn’t have to explain 



18 


Barbara Bennett 


those things, but it seemed very important 
to the future of the Caucus at that time. I was 
willing to do it and the members were willing 
to have it done. 

The issue of lesbianism came up very early 
in the 1970s. I know I had a lot of people 
disagree with me, but I think this issue became 
a big problem. I went to the first women’s 
political convention in Houston in 1977, I 
think. We had groups breaking any from 
the core of the National Women’s Political 
Caucus, setting up lesbian caucuses, which 
was certainly their privilege. No one cared 
about their sexual orientation—which I didn’t 
then and still don’t—but I’m still convinced 
that it really slowed down the women’s 
movement. In order to make progress we 
had to deal with it face on—not by telling 
them, “You can’t do this,’—but by refusing to 
let them control either the national caucus 
or local ones. They were always welcome 
members and their concerns were addressed, 
but the majority of us felt that they should not 
be permitted to take over. 

I’ve never been a member of the League 
of Women Voters. The intent of the League 
has never been to search out candidates, raise 
monies for them, or help them get elected. 
They were into other areas, presenting issues 
on both sides, and that was the difference 
between the Caucus and the League of 
Women Voters. The Caucus sought to take 
stands and tried to help the candidates 
who understood the problems that we were 
attempting to address. We also worked on 
legislation, changing Nevada laws that were 
discriminatory. The League never got into 
that. We had many things in common with 
the BPW and the League of Women Voters, 
as well as other organizations. But I think that 
at that time, our role was specific enough so 
that we attracted women not only from those 


groups, but also others from outside those 
areas, too. 

One Nevada law that was on the books 
back then was the fact that a woman could 
not go into business without her husband’s 
signature. It didn’t matter if she was the sole 
support of the family or if he was an invalid. 
It didn’t matter what the circumstances were, 
which was so ridiculous. It was crazy— 
absolutely insane. When we first started 
fighting this law, we hadn’t run into the Janine 
Hansens of the world. When she believed 
in something, she was—and probably still 
is—one of the most articulate, well-informed 
people you will ever run into. I have told her 
so. She and I agree on practically nothing, but 
I’ve always respected her, because she never 
showed up for a debate or to make a speech 
when she didn’t have her facts. 

Janine Hansen was active with the Eagle 
Forum. I think that that group, as well as other 
groups like it, had a contempt for women— 
and still do to this day. They saw us as an 
irreligious group because so many of their 
positions had developed as a result of their 
religious training and beliefs. 

The decade between 1973 and 1982 seemed 
to produce women who were interested in 
social issues. For instance, by September of 
1973, we were undoubtedly full steam ahead 
because there had been speculation about 
major office holders, and many men were 
being mentioned as potential candidates. The 
Caucus was upset because not a single woman 
was mentioned. So I wrote a letter to the 
editor, which was picked up in the Las Vegas 
paper as well as here, and they wrote editorials 
on it. I’m not sure they were too pleased that 
they had to admit that we were right—that 
women had simply been overlooked and 



Becoming a Political Activist 


19 


hadn’t even been considered when it came to 
advanced offices on the state level. 

The major goal of the Women’s Political 
Caucus then became to get women to run 
for office. In the northern part of the state, 
at least, a lot of women candidates came out 
of that. There was Jean Ford, who was from 
the southern part of the state. Jean was active 
politically perhaps even before I was because 
she was president of the League of Women 
Voters. The northern part and the southern 
part of the state didn’t have the ties at that 
time that we developed later on. There were 
a lot of women activists in the southern part 
of the state that didn’t run for office, or who 
were not elected. Certainly, Jean served for 
a long time and was very active in a lot of 
these things. 

Nancy Gomes was another woman who 
came from the Caucus. She served on the 
school board for two terms and then was 
elected to the legislature in 1977. I managed 
that campaign for her, because we had become 
very dose friends. 

Mary Frazzini also served in the 
legislature. She was elected before the Caucus 
came into being in 1973. She finished out one 
term, but was beaten the next time she ran. 
Through the BPW, Mary decided to put on 
a seminar on politics in government. I think 
it ran for eight weeks. They talked about 
running political campaigns—how to get 
involved and about contacting both state and 
national legislators. That one really had me 
fired up politically! 

There was Mary Gojack, who served in the 
state assembly in 1973. From 1975 to 1977, 
she served in the state senate. She ran in 1980 
against Paul Laxalt for his United States Senate 
seat, and was always a champion of the poor 
and women’s issues. I’m sure it was obvious 
that she wasn’t going to be a winner, but at 
the same time you have to start somewhere. 


Mary also lost in the race in 1982 for the US. 
House of Representatives seat against Barbara 
Vucanovich. 

Eleanor Waugh ran for the state assembly 
in 1972. She was not elected, but she came 
out of the Caucus. She was a Republican, 
incidentally, but she was very strong on 
women’s issues and also on a lot of social 
issues. I did not personally work on her 
campaign because I had my hands full with 
others. In 1976, Elbe ran for the assembly as 
an independent, and lost again. 

Maya Miller was someone the Caucus 
supported. She demonstrated great convictions 
in taking on what was almost surely a losing 
race against Harry Reid for the Democratic 
nomination to the United States Senate in 
1974. She took on the race because we were 
encouraging women to run, to speak out and 
be heard, and to make the issues that were 
important to us a part of the public record. 
Despite the fact that she was defeated, Maya 
has remained a strong advocate of women’s 
rights. She has been a tremendous help to 
women, not just collectively or as groups, 
but as individuals. I can cite a number of 
cases where individuals who needed help 
or had problems were helped by Maya. She 
has always been a champion of the poor and 
minorities, too. I was her treasurer, and her 
campaign manager, Ken Bode, came out of 
Washington, D.C. He is now the political 
analyst for NBC National News. It’s kind of 
interesting to note that. 

It sounds rather foolish to say that the 
Caucus really worked hard to find qualified 
women, because certainly no one ever 
demanded that qualified men run for office. 
I think that the history of incompetent 
legislators and local officials bears that out. 
So while women were expected to be highly 
qualified for anything they wanted, it was not 



20 


Barbara Bennett 


also a demand upon men who chose to run 
for the same offices. 

Obviously, the Caucus never supported 
anyone who did not understand women’s 
issues and did not at least have empathy for 
them. But we supported men coming from 
the same positions who were knowledgeable 
about womens and social issues. So we were 
never simply a we’re-going-to-throw-out- 
all-the-men-and-put-women-in-their-places 
kind of an organization. 

Though many candidates supported by 
the Caucus lost, you have to start somewhere. 
You have to get your name out there, because 
the name recognition is absolutely essential. 
More than anything else, I believe, it has been 
women who forced discussion of issues that 
are important to women. We talked about 
health care, for instance. Those issues came 
to the floor because women wanted to discuss 

them, and forced discussions on them. 

When Mary Gojack ran in 1982, she ran 

against Barbara Vucanovich for the U.S. House 
of Representatives. Barbara Vucanovich and 
her daughter, Patty Cafferata, have been very 
active. But when you encourage women to 
run for office, you can’t encourage only those 
who agree with you. When we encourage 
women to run for office, we believe that they 
should stand on a record, if they have one, 
or on their position on issues. Even back 

then, single mothers trying to survive with 
children were a major issue and had our 
attention. Discrimination also caught a lot 
of our attention and time. The aims of the 
Caucus were really tremendous, but charges 
were levied against us by right-wing fringe 
people that we were out to break up the family. 
We still hear those charges today, which is 
absolutely asinine. It’s the last thing in the 
world that a woman with a mind wants to do. 

Abortion was not an issue right at that 
time. As a matter of fact, I don’t remember 


exactly when it became a much bigger issue— 
probably after the Supreme Court ruling, but 
I really don’t remember. 

One thing we were aware of was that the 
Reno City Council did not have a woman on 
any board or commission in 1975 that I’m 
aware of. On the other hand, men rampantly 
used these posts as stepping stones into politics: 
you serve on a board or commission; you 
learn about how government is functioning; 
you develop some name recognition; and 
you move on from there another step up the 
ladder. And when women are denied those 
kinds of roles in a community, it makes it very 
difficult for them to advance. It also makes 
it absolutely shocking when someone like 
myself is ultimately elected mayor. 

The Equal Rights Amendment was 
introduced in the legislature in resolution 
form in 1973 and it didn’t get anywhere. Then 
in 1975 I guess the assembly passed it but the 
senate rejected it. I still have a tile of letters from 
people like Bill Raggio discussing our efforts 
on behalf of the Equal Rights Amendment, for 
which we testified, and the contacts we made 
with the legislators down there. 

In 1977 we really went after it. We 
attempted to get some help from the Women’s 
Political Caucus in California, which had 
enjoyed a certain degree of success in 
getting it ratified there. I went down there 
and developed a course for training women 
about the facts of ERA and the problems that 
we were facing—why we needed it, how to 
testify before the legislature, and a progression 
of things that we ought to be doing to be 
as effective as we possibly could. Our two 
groups worked together in developing this 
spelled-out program for all of the steps that 
we were going to take, how we were going to 
get women down to the legislature, get them 
to write letters, and get petitions going. It was 




Becoming a Political Activist 


21 


an educational process to really cover all of the 
issues that comprised what we believed to be 
the need for the Equal Rights Amendment. 
But it didn’t pay off. 

The opposition was extremely well 
organized and very well financed. The 
Mormon church was certainly one of the 
major movers—or at least members—behind 
it. I know that the Mormon church would 
object to it being said that they were behind 
it, but it was always our impression that they 
certainly played a very important role in 
the loss of the Equal Rights Amendment. I 
remember sitting in the legislature and seeing 
these Mormon women dragging their little 
kids up to the stand and screaming about 
sharing bathrooms, [laughs] I thought we 
had it made, and couldn’t believe it when 
those kinds of arguments were the ones that 
cropped up nationwide. 

At first a husband or father or brother 
would not want their mother or another 
female member of their family to be denied 
an opportunity to perform a job that they 
were perfectly capable of doing—one that 
would permit them to make a salary equal to 
or at least somewhat equal to those men were 
making at that time. And yet, when it came 
time, all of this went out the window and it 
was emotion that ruled from then on. it is a 
very difficult, if not impossible, thing to deal 
with. How do you argue with someone who 
says, “We’re not going to have women using 
the same toilets as men,” when they’d been 
using them on airplanes for 50 years. I just 
don’t understand it 

That was only one of their arguments; 
then the religious arguments came into it. 
This is a religious country, and so when 
they convinced people that somehow the 
relationship between man, woman and family 
would be destructibly altered because of the 
Equal Rights Amendment, that was it. 


Of course, when abortion became an 
issue, we saw a lot of Catholic women coming 
in, too, who had very strong opinions. Many 
of them did agree with us on social issues, but 
they remain completely at odds with support 
for the abortion issue. 

One of the things that was so frustrating 
and angering is that Janine Hansen at that 
time, for instance, ran for Congress. Janine 
Hansen was so busy with so many issues, she 
never had time to be at home with her family. 
She got a divorce. So here she was doing all of 
the things that she was saying that the Equal 
Rights Amendment was going to compel all 
other women to do.... I have never believed 
in attacking on a personal level, and did not 
attack her that time on that level. Sometimes 
I wonder if we shouldn’t have dealt with it, 
because we didn’t play their game and they 
creamed us. 

When we couldn’t get the federal ERA 
passed, we decided to make an effort for a 
state ERA. But we couldn’t even get it off the 
ground. The same people opposed it, and they 
were able to convince the same legislators to 
oppose it on all the same grounds. But there 
were many women—not Janine Hansens, but 
just ordinary women—who opposed the ERA. 
They were afraid to be taken down off this so- 
called pedestal and be forced out of the home 
to go to work. They believed that they would 
be forced to have their children cared for in 
a communist-type child care setting. All of 
those arguments were reaching ill-informed 
women, and they did have an impact, there’s 
no question about it. 

The ultra-conservative elements 
marshalled their forces and were very 
important in the defeat of the ERA. The other 
thing is that there was not enough money to 
really go after the ERA. Then there is also the 
political fact of life, whether it evolves around 
an issue of that sort or electing someone: 



22 


Barbara Bennett 


once you are put on the defensive, you may as 
well forget it. And we were on the defensive 
at the time. Despite our efforts, the ERA 
was rejected by the assembly, though it did 
pass the senate—just the opposite of what 
happened in 1975. Then in 1978, it was again 
defeated by a referendum vote in the state. 

Though the ERA was defeated, Nevada 
women did gain some things in state 
legislation, like equality in credit rating and 
equal opportunity in jobs. I always had the 
feeling that that was sort of an apology on 
behalf of legislators. It was a “sop,” so to speak, 
because they refused to pass the ERA—they 
felt freer in being able to say, “Well, we don’t 
really need the ERA now, we’ve taken care of 
all the laws that were discriminatory, so now 
we’re fine.” 

But there’s one major difference, though: 
when you do that on a state level, it’s always 
possible to change those laws that have passed. 
Any law of that significance, in my opinion, 
ought to be a national law. You shouldn’t be 
able to go from one state to the next and have 
your fights either abridged or denied because 
of some quirk. 

The ERA is a dead issue now, because 
many of the laws that were so offensive to us 
have been changed as a result of our efforts 
to do something about it. If there appears 
on the horizon another one that we find 
extremely offensive, I feel that we have a good 
opportunity of getting it changed, because 
women understand that issue now. The 
majority of them-children or no children— 
are having to work outside of the home. Today 
women have advanced and have a better 
chance at equality than they did 15 or 20 years 
ago because of the individual legislation that 
has been passed. Attitudes have also changed. 

An example of changing attitudes involves 
our oldest daughter. She went to work for the 
telephone company as an operator 18 years 


ago. For about the past seven or eight years, 
maybe even longer, she has been in jobs that 
were previously exclusively male. She makes 
very good money. She’s one of only four 
in the state, and the only woman that does 
work involving special electronic switching 
systems. Sherry is an expert. She travels to all 
of these places, and makes fantastic money. 
Those doors would never have opened to her 
or other women just like her, and there’s a lot 
of instances like that, just at the telephone 
company—you see them all over town. Look 
at the women you see now in construction 
that never were there before. You see them 
in engineering, where they could go on to 
the university, get a degree and never get a 
job as an engineer anyplace because they 
couldn’t be hired. All of that has changed. 
Some marvelous things have come out of it. 

Attitudes have changed because this is a 
changed world in which these young women 
are living. That “privilege” has been theirs 
from the day that they started school, because 
some of us cared enough to try to change 
things. Unfortunately, so many of them take 
it for granted. It’s sort of like labor unionism. 
They don’t understand that there were people 
out there on the lines working to change these 
things all through the years in order to permit 
them to do the things that they can do today. 
They think nothing of it, though, because it’s 
just their right. The right has always been 
there, but it was denied to a lot of people. 

The Equal Rights Amendment won’t come 
up again because it’s just an emotional thing 
now that probably isn’t needed. I certainly 
don’t see it coming back in Nevada. I don’t 
even see the federal government taking it on 
again. As a matter of fact, I would be opposed 
to trying to do that at this point in time when 
there are so many other currently critical 
issues involving children having children. 
And we have the issue of the single working 



Becoming a Political Activist 


23 


mother trying to raise children. It’s good to 
know, especially in retrospect, that you can 
lose a battle that’s so important to you and 
still have the ultimate results of the issues 
raised during that time come out in a very 
favorable way 

In 1974,1 think, the owner of the mobile 
home park in which we still live began to 
hit us with absolutely atrocious increases. 
We had bought a mobile home because we 
thought it was a place that we would retire 
that we could afford. The space rent was $75 
a month, and rental increases were jumping 
gigantically—$35 at a crack. You’d get one and 
then six months later you’d get another one. It 
was simply an attitude of all the market would 
bear, because we had severe housing shortages 
and problems at that time. 

With the help of Florence Gird, I founded 
the Northern Nevada Mobile Homeowners 
Association. We did a lot of lobbying, because 
the laws that were on the books were entirely 
slanted toward the benefit of landlords. You 
had very few rights. We enjoyed some degree 
of success in getting some laws changed down 
there, but we couldn’t do anything about the 
outrageous increases that were forcing many 
of the elderly out of the mobile home parks 
all over the area. Many had bought retirement 
homes and found that their space costs 
increased. Some were walking away from it, 
because they simply could not afford them. 

The really ironic situation was that 
so many people were being forced into 
subsidized housing because they had to leave 
the mobile home parks. A new Volunteers 
of America building was constructed, and I 
don’t know how many elderly people from the 
mobile home park just left their homes and 
moved in there, because they said they could 
not tolerate the increases. And that was only 
a small piece of it. There were family parks 


in town with a couple of children in them 
where the parents were hard pressed to buy 
a home and pay the initial rent even without 
all of these increases coming along. So we 
moved in the direction of rent justification... 
not rent control. We were saying, “All right. 
We understand that if your expenses are 
increasing, you have a right to increase our 
space rent accordingly. If your taxes increase, 
we expect an increase. But we do not expect to 
get these increases when your taxes have been 
lowered. You paid less than you did last year. 
Your costs of operating are not significantly 
higher than they were a year ago, and rent 
increases far exceed anything that you could 
possibly justify.” 

So that became a local issue which 
involved the mobile home people. There are 
thousands of us in this community. That led 
me to city council meetings—to attempt to 
get this rent justification ordinance passed. Ed 
Spoon was a member of the Reno City Council 
at that time. He said he would introduce the 
legislation for us, and he did. However, when 
it came time to be heard before the council, 
Ed Spoon said, “I introduced the legislation, 
but I’m going to vote against it”—which really, 
absolutely, was a political double cross. There’s 
no other word for it. Therefore we didn’t have 
a good chance to get it through, but we had 
made headway in pointing out the problems 
to the legislature. Sooner or later, we felt that 
we could convince the city council that it was 
a real problem in this community. And it was, 
there’s no question about it. 

We lost the battle, but we won in the 
sense that we changed a lot of laws that really 
benefitted mobile home people. For instance, 
we effected many roles, such as park owners 
have to give you notice of several months 
before they increase space rent, and if they 
sell the park and you have to move, they have 
to pay the expenses for doing some of this. A 



24 


Barbara Bennett 


lot of protections were built into the law that 
had never existed. 

The gains that we made were at the state 
level in the legislature rather than the city. The 
greatest degree of success that we enjoyed with 
legislators was in proving to them that there 
was a very serious problem with mobile home 
tenants being ripped off in this state. There 
was a large group down in Las Vegas at that 
time which became pretty powerful, so we had 
legislators on both ends of the state listening 
to us. They recognized that the problem was 
statewide and that it wasn’t just something 
that we dealt with here. They told mobile park 
tenants and owners that if these same kinds 
of conditions existed at the next session of the 
legislature, they would be willing to look very 
hard at some rent justification means. 

As far as activism and my family life 
is concerned, I’m one of those fortunate 
women that has a husband who was never 
a chauvinist. The children’s lives were not 
impacted in any negative way, and while 
they did not show any interest at that time in 
what I was doing, times have changed. They 
have moved into some areas now where they 
are involved and where they care about the 
issues. But back then they were taken up 
with far more important things than social 
issues—like the latest record that had come 
out. [laughs] Back in the 1960s, though, there 
were some teenagers who were interested 
in social issues. It seems like that was more 
common then than it is today. I think my 
children knew some of the things that were 
going on. They were upset over the Vietnam 
War, but not so upset that they would really 
become involved in doing anything about it. 
They weren’t out on any lines picketing or 
doing anything of that sort. Their involvement 
has come much later in life. 


My activism and concerns have had 
an influence, but all youngsters go in their 
own direction, you know. I’m sure that my 
concerns about social issues are really shared 
by everyone in the family, so that’s a very 
worthwhile by-product of my involvements. 
At the same time, it was rare if I didn’t manage 
to make it home to get dinner on the table. 



4 

County Commission and 
City Council Campaigns 


I ran for the Washoe County Commission 
in 1975.1 had talked it over with John, and by 
then the kids were pretty much on their own. I 
didn’t have a specific goal, but I did want to be 
a city council or county commission member. 
I was interested in the county commission 
because of a lot of things that were happening, 
but I had not thought in terms of being the 
mayor at that point in time. While I was 
known for little bitty things, I really didn’t 
have sufficient name recognition. 

In 1974, about a year before I ran for 
County Commissioner, the Blue Ribbon Task 
Force Report came in. The task force was a 
project of the Regional Planning Commission 
and Area Council of Governments. It was 
intended to come up with a design for the 
future of the area. Many active, well-informed 
people served on the Task Force. 

I suppose I’m one of the very few in the 
area who read the entire report—not once but 
many times. It was ten volumes. I had occasion 
to refer to them many times throughout the 
years. But the recommendations in there were 
so wise, so well thought out and researched. 


The reports dealt with water, transportation, 
education, the quality of life, air quality... there 
were so many of them. 

The Blue Ribbon Task Force Reports 
were certainly one of the main reasons that I 
ran for county commissioner, and I strongly 
advocated that their recommendations be 
seriously considered and become a part of 
law. But you’re dealing with elected officials, 
and recommendations are one thing. I think 
it’s criminal that all of that hard work and 
tremendous knowledge that went into the 
Blue Ribbon reports and recommendations 
were not followed. If these things had been 
put into practice, we would not have reached 
the state where we are today...we absolutely 
should not have, because we were warned. 

As a matter of fact, there was a planner 
named Richard Eckert who wrote a very 
lengthy editorial in 1975. It said, “We are in an 
area where the population is going to exceed 
a quarter of a million; winter months will 
feature constant smog and carbon monoxide 
health hazards; most of the influx of persons 
will be low-paid gaming industry employees 



26 


Barbara Bennett 


unable to afford housing in the swanky new 
subdivisions. High-density apartments will 
spring up everywhere... 

He also predicted that in order to finance 
police and fire protection, education, and 
other essential services, property taxes would 
soar. Obviously these things happened and 
tax payers rose up in arms, and we wound 
up with the legislature putting a cap on what 
we could do. He also predicted that the crime 
rate would rise, the demand for water would 
triple, and there would be chronic shortages. 
I made a note in the margin of the article that 
says, “How prophetic.” 

I’ve discussed this with other people who 
really care about the quality of life. At the 
same time I’m aware of how important it is 
for people to have jobs, because I’ve had to 
work my whole life.... It’s not an unimportant 
matter. However, it has always been my 
argument that this community is fragile and it 
can only stand so much development. What is 
important is whether we are going to have that 
development in 10 years, 20 years, 50 years, 
or whether we are going to cram it all in at 
one time, where we suffer all of the problems 
that Richard Eckert described. 

I went on to actually preach about water 
for years, because our water situation back 
in 1977 was absolutely critical. That was the 
drought year of 1977-1978, and the people 
of the community cooperated beautifully. 
We all put bricks in our toilets and shower 
restrictors in, and we saved water. We were 
very conscientious about it. What was so 
damaging and so destructive to the public 
attitude at that time was the fact that the 
politicians were giving away more and more of 
our resources that we simply could not afford. 

Ironically, a separate water report came 
in at that time. The committee that wrote the 
report was comprised of some water experts, 
but more importantly of the really pro-growth 


advocates who felt that nothing could stand 
in the way of development. They thought 
we had absolutely no problems with a water 
shortage, whereas many other people who 
knew the history of this area thought that we 
were heading for trouble. Yet all of the time 
we had been skimming along for many years, 
with Sierra Pacific having to acquire new 
water rights in order to serve new projects. 

There are elected officials and those in the 
development community who believe that 
you absolutely have to have a three percent 
rate of growth in order to keep from being 
a dying city, which is idiotic. There are many 
cities across this country that don’t grow at 
all or grow barely one percent a year that are 
very successful. So that just isn’t true. But the 
real danger in that kind of thinking is that if 
you compound a three-and-a-half, four-and- 
a-half percent growth rate every year for 20 
years, you don’t have a three percent growth 
rate at the end of the road—you’ve got a 
significantly higher percentage of growth. But 
no one was ever willing to deal with planned 
growth in terms of not approving projects 
in excess of our ability to provide necessary 
resources. In my way of thinking, there lies 
the entire problem, even today. 

Growth was one of my campaign issues 
when I ran for County Commission. Mine 
was not really an active campaign, because 
that was at the same time that Maya was 
running for the Senate. Her campaign took 
up a great deal of my time because the records 
had to be so precise, so honest, so accurate. 
We were not about to place women in a 
position where they could be criticized for 
being wrong, so that took a great deal of time 
and I was also working full-time. 

I got my name out there, discussed 
things whenever the opportunity arose, but 
I never made any effort to raise funds, and I 
did very little in the way of printing. I had a 



County Commission and City Council Campaigns 


27 


card printed up with my major positions on 
it, and I walked when I could. A few people 
walked with me, but it was not a hard-hitting 
campaign—the kind that you have to mount 
if you want to be elected. But this was my 
first attempt to get my name out there. As a 
matter of fact, it surprised the daylights out of 
me when I decided to run for office. But the 
womens issues led me into that. I had never 
considered running for office, never. 

I have always been willing to do homework. 
To this day, I hate to lose an argument because 
I didn’t do enough background checking on 
it. I lost a terrible debate one time because I 
didn’t do enough homework, and I learned 
a good lesson from it. When you get into 
reading these things and you form your own 
opinions and conclusions, you don’t want to 
just keep them to yourself if the issues are as 
important as they seem to be. 

I spent a lot of time talking to women’s 
groups, senior groups, mobile home tenants, 
and others. If I had an opportunity to talk 
about the kinds of things that affected 
their lives, then I wanted to do that. In the 
beginning I was a very nervous public speaker, 
but the Toastmistress Club helped a lot with 
that. Toastmistress teaches people how to 
relax and speak to the public. They are very 
effective, and it was a tremendous help to 
me. Ultimately I became a very accomplished 
public speaker. Always behind that was the 
fact that my homework was done thoroughly. 
If someone threw a question at me from the 
audience, I wasn’t surprised or shocked, and 
I didn’t say, “No comment” 

I never got through the primary for the 
race for County Commissioner-nor did 
the man who defeated me win the general 
election. So that was that. But the important 
thing was that my name got out there—there 
had been some more people who had heard 
about me that never knew of me before. As it 


happened, the media had found the tenants’ 
battle to be very interesting and gave us a lot of 
coverage, which also put my name out front. 

I don’t think that there was anyone elected 
to the commission at that time with whom 
I agreed on the growth issue. Some people 
liked to talk about growth on the County 
Commission, just like some of them did on 
the Reno City Council. But it was what they 
considered to be growth, not the kind of terms 
that I was talking about—that we should be 
limiting growth in this community because of 
our resources. I also thought that we should 
be diversifying so that we wouldn’t build a 
population of low-paid, low-income families 
and single individuals who couldn’t afford to 
buy a home in this community. 

After I was defeated for the commission 
post in 1974,1 ran for City Council in 1977. 
Again, the growth issue was important to 
me. Most of the important things in the area 
of growth were taking place in the city of 
Reno at that time. This was during a time 
when we were getting into this huge boom 
situation—the time of the construction of the 
MGM hotel-casino.... There was definitely a 
pro-growth council, and almost everything 
was breezing right through. This was after 
some of the drought years, and some people 
really resented it. After all, Reno residents 
had put bricks in their toilets to save water, 
and then all of these casinos were approved 
by the City Council. The residents were well 
aware of this—more so than the elected 
representatives, who, unfortunately, have a 
tendency to only surround themselves and 
mix with those people who think as they do. 
But if you’re not talking to the general public, 
you only hear that everything’s OK from your 
friends and business associates. So it was very 
difficult for the elected officials to believe that 
not everyone was perfectly happy to have an 
MGM hotel in this city. 



28 


Barbara Bennett 


When I ran for City Council in 1977, there 
was a group of businessmen that had selected 
a slate of candidates. They endorsed Bruno 
Menicucci, who was running for reelection 
at that time. I don’t remember some of the 
others except for Ed Oaks. There was a very 
pro-business endorsement, which you would 
expect to come from a pro-business group. 

The contractors had a great deal to say, 
and they also had the money to pour into 
races, which is no small matter when it comes 
to being elected to office. Out of that group, 
the one that they endorsed in the large race 
that I ran in was Bill Wallace, who defeated 
me for the City Council seat. 

During the 1977 race, the public was very 
upset about what was happening, but there 
was absolutely no organization—everyone 
was fragmented. Some individuals did speak 
out. I think Bill Eadington, a professor of 
economics at the university, always had to 
be careful about what he said on the growth 
issue, and probably still does. Ultimately, it 
was his opinion—it’s not fact. I worked with 
Margaret Eadington a little on the growth 
issue. I certainly relied on Bill because he did 
a lot of the writing on gaming and growth. 
He wrote from a standpoint of economics, 
not just from an interest in growth. I was a 
fan of his and still am to this day, because I 
consider him a well-rounded, very sane asset 
to this community. 

There was a lot of pressure and heat put on 
a number of professors at the university about 
this growth situation. As a matter of fact, there 
were even articles written in the paper about it. 
The business community said that they didn’t 
like contributing to the university when some 
professors were speaking against what they 
thought were their growth interests. But what 
the professors were speaking about was some 
sanity of growth in this community. They 
were not speaking in opposition to business 


interests. That resulted in putting kind of a 
“gag order” on these people, I assume, because 
most of them have been very quiet ever since 
then. Dick Sill was someone who spoke out 
very strongly about the air quality. He’s dead 
now, but I can’t imagine ever putting a gag 
order on Dick Sill, [laughs] 

During the race I didn’t get much up¬ 
front support from people in the university 
community. I’m sure there was a great deal 
of quiet support behind the scenes, though. 
Those who supported me knew where I 
stood on growth. The race, like all City 
Council races, was non-partisan. I always 
did everything I could to keep it that way, 
too. I never let party politics get into the City 
Council. 

We worked harder on the City Council 
race than we had on the commission race. 
We did more door-to-dooring because by 
that time I had retired and had more time. 
We still didn’t raise very much money. I’ve 
always strenuously objected to the cost of 
campaigning. Of course, it has become 
vulgar since that time. I felt one should run a 
campaign on as little money as possible, using 
volunteers, and I always did that—always. I 
think I only collected about $1,400 in the 1977 
race because I never solicited money a lot. 
Nancy Gomes wrote a letter on my behalf to 
supporters of hers. We rote a letter, of course, 
seeking the support of the members of the 
Women’s Political Caucus, and there were 
people who came through with small amounts 
of money—but not the $500 contributions 
that the important people attract. These were 
small, person-to-person donations, and it was 
enough to get the job done. 

People were just beginning to pay attention 
to the issues, and the paper was beginning to 
quote me in a few places here and there. Then, 
in September, 1977,1 was asked by the Nevada 
State League of Cities to be a speaker up at its 



County Commission and City Council Campaigns 


29 


meeting in Ely. All of the council members 
and mayors from all over the state attended 
this event. At that time, housing was a crucial 
issue because the MGM Grand was being 
completed and thousands of people were 
moving to Reno to work there. Plus Harrah’s 
had expanded and they put in other new 
hotel-casinos. They were all labor-intensive 
industries, and if you have labor-intensive 
industries you have to have housing. As it was, 
there was already a terrible housing crunch 
in the area. 

Anyway, housing, obviously, was a major 
problem during that time, and I addressed 
that issue when I was at the League of 
Cities meeting in Ely. I said, “Even the 
most die-hard, unlimited growth advocates 
will eventually realize that we’ve created a 
monster. Washoe County could be faced 
with serious multimillion-dollar school 
bond issues, and more real estate inflation if 
something isn’t done to control growth. We 
might even have to consider a year-round 
school to handle all the kids.” We’re still living 
with new multimillion-dollar bond issues for 
almost everything we want to do, as well as 
rising real estate costs. 

Those costs at the time were among 
the absolute highest in the country. Keep 
that in the context of a community which 
has always had 50 percent of the jobs being 
service-oriented. I think that the percentage 
of service jobs in this community now has 
reached 70 percent. I said at that time and 
have continued to say for many years that 
developers should be required to provide 
not only environmental impact statements, 
but should also be required to deal with 
the effects that a project will have in other 
areas, such as population, economic impact, 
transportation, and resources. The public 
mood was one of frustration, because after 
people had worked together to save water, the 


city council put all the water that had been 
saved into development efforts. They didn’t 
even have the good judgment to wait for a 
year or so. [laughs] 

Here today we find ourselves going 
through the same kind of situation, and 
fortunately some council members have said 
that whatever water has been conserved will 
be reserved for use in this community, and 
will not be allocated for new growth. I hope 
they do, because if we don’t, we’re in terrible 
trouble. And people haven’t forgotten those 
days. Since then, thousands and thousands 
of new people have come to this community, 
attracted by the jobs, however low-paying 
they may be. 

No one likes to say, “I told you so,” but I 
think it’s important for history to reveal that 
none of what we’re experiencing now should 
come as a surprise to anyone. There were 
enough of us—starting with the Blue Ribbon 
Task Force—who worked their tails off on 
that. There are many people like myself who 
have felt very strongly that we should monitor 
and limit—not completely prevent —area 
growth, because of the problems attendant 
with the growth-related experience. 

Bill Wallace ultimately won the 1977 race 
for city council. There were 12 candidates in 
the primary—that was a very loaded field. It 
was for the at-large seat for the city council. 
Joe Latimore, who had been a city manager, 
and Bill were the two top vote-getters in the 
primary, and Bill went on to win. I don’t 
remember what other seat was up for election. 
There had to have been at least one other seat 
up at that time. 

There were some interesting things 
that happened after my loss in the primary, 
because I had essentially been speaking to the 
issues of growth, which were really more and 
more on the mind of the public at that time. 



30 


Barbara Bennett 


When the new council was seated at the end of 
June, there were three councilmen: Ed Spoon, 
Ed Oaks, and Bill Wallace. Ed Spoon had 
said at that time that all major developments 
should be halted until the housing shortage 
had been resolved. That’s because there was 
an article in the paper dealing with housing. 
However, Ed Spoon ended up voting against 
very few developments. This was always a 
problem that I had with people when they ran 
for office: making promises to the public and 
either not caring, or conveniently forgetting 
them once they had arrived. 

Wallace had said that he was very reluctant 
to approve any more large commercial 
developments, and in fact he didn’t support 
everything that came along. I had no problem 
with Bill’s integrity. He changed his mind on 
some occasions, and I believe that he saw it as 
being for very good reasons. However, it didn’t 
help. After all, he told the public he wasn’t 
going to approve any more large commercial 
developments. 

I did not endorse Bill Wallace when 
he ran the second time in 1979, although 
he was not a bad man. He was very angry 
because I endorsed someone else in the race, 
but there was absolutely nothing personal in 
it. I endorsed someone whose thoughts and 
concerns about growth in this community 
were far more compatible with mine than 
were those of Bill Wallace. Bill was not 100 
percent in favor of all of these things that 
were still going on after he was elected. He 
was occasionally a voice of reason, but that 
was not often enough. 

When I lost the race for City Council, I 
think I leaned some things. For one thing, 
you learn from each and every campaign. 
You become more professional in how you go 
about it, how to write a better press release, 


and how to get publicity that’s free, among 
other things. You have to learn these things 
if you’re running. In other words, you learn 
a lot more about organizing a campaign. You 
also learn about the pitfalls of a campaign. 
You learn that there’s always someone out 
there who wants to make you over into what 
they perceive to be the public image of an 
acceptable candidate or elected official. For 
instance, people in the community who have 
seen you for years know what you look like. 
I’ll begin dressing like Liz Taylor and running 
around with a lot of makeup, in the first place 
I’d bankrupt myself, in the second place I’d be 
changing myself when in fact I have no desire 
to change. I am what I am and I want people 
to know that if I’m elected, this is what they’re 
getting. But I did have people in my campaign 
suggest just that. 

A few years ago Barbara Vucanovich 
rinsed her hair a gray-blue, and people 
began to talk about her blue hair. I’m sure 
that someone told her it was time for her to 
let her hair change, but she decided to get 
back to brown and not let it change to gray, 
[laughs] I’m sure this came as a result of the 
people who managed her campaigns, saying 
they wanted her to appear as young as possible 
to the voting audience out there. That’s only 
a part of the image. A woman must not be 
too harsh in the way she debates, argues, 
or speaks, which can create problems for a 
Barbara Bennett. 

When I’m committed to things, I can be 
very fierce. That’s something that has to be 
guarded against. You have to be effective, 
make your points strongly with a guard 
against being offensive. It’s a very tight line 
for someone like me to walk. There are 
times when I would just really love to have 
spoken my mind to some elements of this 
community.... I have gone farther than that, 



County Commission and City Council Campaigns 


31 


even, a couple of times. It’s a hard line. I have 
been very harsh in my criticism of special 
interest groups, whether it be developers or 
whoever, whenever a group’s self-interest has 
taken far greater precedence over the interest 
of this community. 




_5 

Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


I decided to run for mayor of Reno. The 
primary for the 1979 mayoral election was in 
May, and the general election was held in June, 
so I really started running in late 1978, getting 
my campaign organized. Raising money was 
a problem, because I knew that whoever ran 
as the darling of the business community 
would raise whatever money was necessary. 
I had the same group of people working with 
me as before, but we had added a lot more 
people by then, too—a lot of seniors and a lot 
of teachers. We also had the support of a lot of 
working mothers, because all of these issues 
were being discussed all the time. 

I started walking early, and I really had an 
opportunity to talk with people. Therefore, 
we were just picking up new names all the 
time—people that believed in what we were 
saying and were willing to help, either with 
small contributions or telephone work. Or 
sometimes the people would walk in their 
neighborhoods or put on a coffee. It was 
really a person-to-person campaign. Some 
university students were also active. Mostly 
the support was behind-the-scenes. 


My campaign manager was Mark 
Handelsman. He was an attorney in town, 
and he is now an elected judge in the Reno 
Municipal Court. Mark had worked with me 
in the mobile home tenants’ group. He gave 
us a lot of free legal help, so we came to know 
each other very well. I have a lot of respect for 
him, because he’s a very honest man and just 
a neat guy. I love him...he reads, he’s nice, he 
has a good heart, and he’s honest. Mark was 
a big help in the campaign because he had 
done some advertising work in addition to 
his legal work. We could only afford one radio 
spot, even when I ran for mayor. We worked 
hard and really organized our effort. We sent 
fund-raising letters. 

Another person who helped was Don 
Richter, who was an insurance man in 
town. There were quite a few other business 
supporters who were behind the scenes, 
because what was happening was beginning 
to hurt them. There had been a lot of what 
they felt was favoritism in how contracts 
were issued, and in how insurance was 
purchased for school groups or city or 



34 


Barbara Bennett 


county government. There was a lot of 
dissatisfaction, and people expressed it at 
the polls. Contributions to my campaign 
came individually. I personally screened 
every check that came in, and had to return 
some, because I would accept only personal 
contributions, not business contributions. 

Suppose an insurance man sends you 
$50 or $100 or whatever. He has a reason 
for that. Maybe he plans to apply to sell 
some insurance that the city is going to buy, 
although I don’t think there was a lot of that 
going on. Or maybe it’s an architect who 
has ties to a construction firm and to other 
developers. I’m not saying they all do, but I’m 
saying that it’s a risk that you can’t take. Either 
you’re serious about taking only individual 
contributions or you’re not. I was serious 
about it. 

During the primary campaign for mayor 
in 1979, Ed Spoon, Bill Granata, and Bruno 
Menicucci were all sitting members of the city 
council. Eddie Scott was still active essentially 
in the black community in town. Bonnie 
Wilson was active in a number of things in the 
community, but I don’t remember what they 
were. Bonnie’s position on growth, I think, 
was not as firm nor as restrictive as I would 
have liked, but nevertheless, she was a strong 
planned-growth advocate. She ran very well 
in the race, incidentally, and in fact, she beat 
Ed Spoon. Bruno Menicucci and I came out 
on top. 

Obviously, we watched the primary 
election evening with a great deal of interest. 
At about the last hour before the absolute final 
returns were in, Bill Granata had been leading 
me by a small margin. But I had really learned 
how to calculate votes and percentages when 
I had managed some political campaigns, 
and I thought I would beat Bill Granata. The 
reason for that was at that time the returns 
from the Stead area were usually the last 


ones to come in. I had worked that area well 
and knew a lot of people, and I was certain 
I would run well out there. Though some 
people believe you should try to strengthen 
your weak areas, I had always believed in 
enforcing your strengths, and that is what I 
did. At any rate, when the final results came 
in, I think I had won by 230 votes, which 
was close, considering there had been a 
large turnout. I think there was a 65 percent 
turnout or something which is very unusual 
for a city primary. I really attribute that to 
the fact that people were terribly frustrated 
over the problems that growth was creating 
in their lives. 

Bill Granata’s term was up, but Ed Spoon 
and Bruno were still mid-term in their city 
council posts, which can create some very 
uncomfortable situations. Bill Granata didn’t 
come out publicly and endorse me after 
his primary defeat, but I think that he was 
instrumental in behind-the-scenes help for 
me in the general election. He had his own 
reasons that he never really chose to discuss 
with me, but I always considered him a factor 
in that. Also, I think it was clear to most 
everyone that I had some behind-the-scenes 
support from business. That was because 
the longevity of businesses was also being 
threatened by the growth situation. After all, 
someone’s got to pay for it. New growth never 
even begins to pay for itself until it’s been in 
place for about 18 months. 

During the campaign for the general 
election I was opposed to the collateral 
sewer plan. It had to do with a consortium of 
business development interests wanting to pay 
$5 million to add some capacity to the sewer 
plant. Bill Wallace and I felt that it was giving 
an unfair advantage to them, and that it would 
be very unfair to the development of the 
community at large. I remember that sewer 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


35 


fees were substantially increased. Obviously, 
the necessary additions to the sewer plant 
came as an immediate result of area growth. 
People who had lived here and paid for sewer 
hookups and fees all through the years felt 
that new people coming in should pay for 
these things. 

I was able to walk and cover a lot of Reno, 
although even then you couldn’t hit every 
house in ton because the city was so large. 
We always had a telephone number where 
if someone had a question and wanted to 
call, they could do so. The impression that I 
had in talking with people was really one of 
substantial support for the positions that I had 
been speaking out on. 

I think that people were surprised that I 
did as well as I did in the south end of town, 
but people at that time had $100,000 or 
$200,000 homes there, and they almost had 
more to lose than someone else if something 
wasn’t done with the growth problems. Here 
we are today with the people that moved to 
the south end of town, because they wanted 
some open space around them; now they find 
that this growth is encroaching and the very 
quality of life and the reasons for which they 
moved out there to begin with are threatened. 
So I think that there was far more support in 
the south end of town from those people than 
anyone anticipated. 

Obviously, I had my other supporters. I 
had a lot of support from the seniors, because 
I had been involved on a voluntary basis 
with them in a number of areas. There were 
also women’s groups working for me. There 
were people from the university working for 
me, too. But there were also those who were 
hostile. I had the door slammed in my face. 
You always will have that from some people, 
but not as often as you might expect. For the 
most part, if people disagreed with you, they 
would say, “Well, I don’t agree with you, but 


more power to you or some foolish remark. 
But most people are not vicious. A few are, but 
not very many. Besides, you’re not going to go 
to the front door of one of your opponents. 
You do avoid some animosity that way. 

During the campaign, the FBI was 
investigating the insurance business of my 
opponent, Bruno Menicucci, and I think 
he blamed his defeat on that. I don’t doubt 
that the FBI investigation hurt him some. 
Eventually it was dropped. I think it was very 
unfortunate, because it hung like a cloud over 
his head, and I really didn’t like it. We’ve seen 
it happen both in the state and across the 
country. I think that they should either have 
charged Bruno with something or dropped 
it early enough so that it didn’t hang over his 
head. I do believe if that investigation had not 
been held, I still would have beaten Bruno 
because of the votes he’d made on growth and 
the position that I had taken. 

Bruno never claimed to be a pro-growth 
person. He said he was a moderate-growth 
person, but actions speak louder than words. 
Bruno’s history dearly indicated that he was 
very pro-growth, and the public was more 
responsive to where I was on growth than 
where Bruno’s was. 

I didn’t get any support from the 
gaming community although I was offered 
a contribution by the Nevada Club. Lincoln 
Fitzgerald was the owner; he’s dead now. 
A woman who worked for Mr. Fitzgerald 
called me and asked me to come in because 
he wanted to talk to me. That was the only 
contact that could be made with him. He 
was very elderly and he had some policies 
concerning his employees that I rather liked. 
I had heard a lot of good things about him. If 
you worked for Fitz and you needed help and 
were a good employee, you could get help. I 
respected him for those things. 



36 


Barbara Bennett 


I set up an appointment to go in and see 
him, and he offered me $1,000, for which I 
thanked him, but I refused. He didn’t ask for 
anything—he never asked for a thing. He didn’t 
say he was going to support me, but I think that 
he thought I was going to win. [laughs] I think 
he had seen enough elections around, and he 
really believed I was going to win. But I told 
him I was taking no special interest money. 
I had no other contacts with the gaming 
community at that time. Some of them took 
shots at me; some of them left me alone. 

Whenever I went for interviews at the 
newspaper, I was asked, of course, about my 
attitude about gaming. I didn’t say that we 
should never, ever have additional gaming 
growth, but I said that in my opinion, it was not 
in the best interests of the gaming community 
to have additional growth. Warren Lerude, of 
the Gazette-Journal, pushed very hard on that. 
I don’t know whether he thought he could 
get me to change my mind or what, but I just 
held firm to my position. He kept asking the 
questions over and over again on my attitude 
about gaming. I didn’t have any problem with 
gaming per se in the community, and they 
did pay a lot of taxes in the city. I just did not 
feel that we should be a city with all our eggs 
in one basket, and I felt that we could not 
continue to experience all of this outrageous 
growth in hotel-casinos. We should also be 
able to bring in some diversified industries. 

I think Mr. Lerude had already assumed 
that I was anti-gaming, which, of course, 
was a wrong assumption, because Reno has 
thousands of people working in the industry. 
After all, I had always been a working person 
and certainly cared about working people. 
But, at any rate, he wrote in an editorial that 
he felt that my attitude toward gaming was not 
healthy. The paper endorsed Bruno, but I won. 

Actually, about two weeks before election 
day, I knew that I was going to win the race. I 


had become very good at figuring percentages 
in the election—how much so we were going 
to win or lose by—and it’s a system that’s 
worked for me on many occasions. I knew 
then that I was going to win, and I went 
about business as usual. I made sure I never 
got cocky, and continued to say the same 
things that I bad been saying since 1976, so 
there was nothing new. I was locked into the 
positions I took. 

On May 31, 1979, which was just a week 
before the general election, John had a heart 
attack. We were at a fund-raising event—a 
bean and hot dog fund-raiser out on the river. 
John became ill and didn’t say anything to 
anyone for a while. Then when I didn’t see 
him, I went looking for him, and when I found 
him he was really looking awful. I thought, 
“Well, I better take him home,” but as we 
started to leave, he collapsed. I knew he was 
in big trouble. Fortunately, we were walking 
by some apartments on the river to get to the 
car, and there was a man out in his backyard. 
He saw John collapse, and went immediately 
and called the paramedics. John’s heart attack 
was a severe one. It was his first heart attack, 
and he might not have made it if that man 
hadn’t called immediately. The paramedics 
responded very fast —very fast. John was in 
the hospital when we were finishing up the 
race, so we pulled in our horns a little bit that 
week. He had to have a pacer inserted and a 
lot of things done. Anyway, it kind of threw 
us for a loop, but he did well while he was in 
the hospital. 

I’ve been asked if that drew some public 
sympathy for me in the race. I think that there 
may have been some of that, but I think it also 
might have been offset by another attitude, 
which was, “Well, this woman’s husband 
has a bad heart, and she ought to be home 
taking care of him—not sitting at city hall.” 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


37 


So I think some people were probably kind 
of upset at me, and I was very upset myself. 
But once John was past the danger point, it 
wasn’t so bad. We had our work done and we 
had some walkers out at that time, and a few 
last-minute things to be done. The doctors put 
my mind at ease—they said John was going 
to recover, and that then they would find out 
what needed to be done. John also urged me 
to go on with the election. He’s always been 
such a strong supporter, and he didn’t want 
me to stop. That made it much easier. 

One of the things that was of interest by 
that time was Joe Conforte [Conforte was the 
owner of the Mustang Ranch brothel—[Ed.] 
Anyone in politics knew that Joe always had 
the most accurate polls around. A week or so 
before the general election, he had made me a 
three to two favorite, and it turned out he was 
right on the button, too. I don’t know why he 
did the polls—maybe he was betting, or maybe 
he just wanted to know. There were a lot of 
people who were benefactors of Joe’s largesse 
through the years. Maybe he had somebody in 
there that he was interested in. I don’t know. 
But he wasn’t a fool when it came to betting, 
and his money was on me three to two. 

The night of the election, my sister came 
up. She and I are very close. She didn’t tell 
me until later, but the reason she had wanted 
to be here was because she was so sure I was 
going to lose and would need to be consoled, 
[laughs] I told her, “Don’t worry about it. I’m 
going to win.” 

She said, “How do you know that?” 

I said, “I just know.” 

Bill Lewis from the newspaper had made 
arrangements to be with me all that night, 
and I’m sure someone was assigned to cover 
Bruno, too. He was surprised that I thought I 
was going to win, too. It was a lovely evening. 

As soon as we got the final results, Norma, 
my kids and I went on over to the hospital 


to see John so we could share the good news 
with him. When we went in to see John in 
his room, he was so tickled when we came m. 
Here he was, having just had a heart attack, 
and he was kicking his legs up into the air, he 
was just so delighted. 

The press had been following us around— 
even followed us up to John’s room. They 
kept asking me if I wasn’t going to declare 
myself a winner. I really wasn’t in a hurry, 
and I certainly didn’t want to make any dumb 
mistakes at that point in time. So I said, “No, 
I’d like to wait for a few more results to come 
in? But, as I said, I knew that I had won. I felt 
I would win by a substantial margin, but I did 
not think I would win three to two. I don’t 
know if they were able to locate Bruno—my 
recollection is that they weren’t. I had heard 
that he was up in the executive area of the 
MGM Grand, but I don’t know. The paper 
was unable to reach him that night. 

Bruno’s loss was not only a shock to 
him, but also to the councilmen who were 
defeated. In fact, two incumbent councilmen 
were defeated. It was one of the throw-the- 
rascals-out kinds of times. It was a shock to all 
of them. Joe McClelland beat Clyde Biglieri, 
and Janice Pine beat Marcel Durant. Clyde 
had that run-in with the grand jury hanging 
over his head. Years later he was cleared of all 
that, but a lot of information was printed that 
never should have come out of the grand jury. 
He won an award some years later, but I think 
that it really hurt him at the time. 

Joe McClelland talked about the need 
to do something about growth when he was 
running for office. But unless you say what’s 
to be done about growth, this leaves a big, 
broad area. I have always hoped that voters 
would pay closer attention to what people 
say and question them, particularly when 
they make an open-ended statement that 
really has no meaning. He was jumping on 



38 


Barbara Bennett 


the growth bandwagon, but he didn’t want to 
lose his source of money from the business 
community by saying that he didn’t support 
slow growth. At the same time he didn’t want 
to lose the voters who did want slow growth, 
so he was sitting on the fence, so to speak. 

A rather happy note is that Joe was very 
good on the social issues. He supported 
CPPAB recommendations—that was the 
Civilian Policy Planning Advisory Board. 
He supported child support for the child 
care center that came up; he supported the 
appointment of minorities to positions on the 
boards and commissions. The only problem 
that I had with Joe was growth. Actually, I did 
have other problems with Joe, but they were 
not political. 

In that election of June 1979, the voters 
also passed the Rancho San Rafael bond issue, 
and they repealed the 3.5 percent tax on food 
-that was Mary Gojack’s bill. 

When I became mayor, the first problem 
that I had, obviously, was to establish the fact 
that I was the mayor at the council table and 
not Bruno. I had to let them know that I was 
not Pat Hardy Lewis, and I was not going to be 
pushed around. This had to be done in some 
rather obvious ways and in some other more 
subtle ways. But I was able to establish that, 
despite the fact that they still didn’t like it. 

Pat Hardy Lewis had been on the city 
council before I became mayor. She was a very 
bright lady. She had seen the need for some 
direction and policy changes where growth 
was concerned in this community, and said 
so, but she was consistently voted down at 
the council table. She was serving with six 
men on the council, and they really gave her 
a hard time. 

Pat’s city council term was 1973 to 1977, 
when she was defeated. That really was too 
bad. She was the only person on the council 
speaking with a reasonably wise voice about 


the growth problems that were already rearing 
their head in the community. One of the men 
that served on the council with her at that 
time was Nick Laud, who said something like, 
“Well, we’re doing all right the way we are. 
We don’t need any growth control measures; 
we don’t need any better zoning ordinances; 
we don’t need anything, just leave us alone.” 
Of course, they did, and we all saw what 
happened. 

When Janice Pine and I were due to move 
to the council table, I figured that maybe some 
of the men thought once again that they were 
going to quickly put us in our place. It didn’t 
happen. I had chaired a great many meetings 
and knew what I wanted to do. I didn’t have 
any doubts about my ability to perform in 
the job, even though there’s no school that 
teaches you how to be a mayor. Believe me, 
it’s an on-the-job experience. 

Surprisingly, I was not nervous in the 
beginning. I was very confident, but not 
cocky. I knew things were going to come up 
that I didn’t know how to handle. But at that 
point in time I relied on Henry Etchemendy, 
who was the city manager. He had gone over 
the agenda and told us how the council had 
handled things in the past, so that I knew 
where I was going. The city manager always 
sits next to the mayor, because they are ones 
that have been out doing all this background 
work, and you need to have him close by to 
talk to him. 

Henry was a great help in my getting 
through the first session’s agenda, which as 
I recall that particular day, did not have any 
controversial items. I think it was because 
there was a swearing-in process and they 
didn’t want to kill us new members—Janice 
and me—right the first day. [laughs] Janice 
Pine is no longer on the council. She certainly 
wasn’t as tough as I’ve been, and you can’t 
really fault her for that. Janice and Bill Wallace 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


39 


were honest people. I’m not saying that the 
others weren’t, because I think the differences 
were largely philosophical. But the problem 
that I had with Janice Pine was that she was 
turned around by the big boys in town. I don’t 
know whether it was just that the pressures 
that were brought to bear on her did it, or 
whether they were able to change her mind. 
I never did know, but it was a problem for 
me, because Janice would one time vote one 
way, and then another time differently. It 
was my opinion that someone got to her and 
somehow managed to change her opinion. 

Janice was from the Crumley family. The 
Crumleys and Pines were two of the most 
powerful families in the state. Janice’s father- 
in-law, Newton Crumley, had a great many 
interests in the community, and still does. 
Her mother-in-law served on the board of 
directors at Harrah’s and Sierra Pacific Power 
Company. I guess she might have bent to 
family pressures or pressure from others. At 
any rate, she never offered the help that I had 
really expected from her. I had hoped that she 
would be a strong supporter on the council for 
the kinds of things that I wanted to get done, 
and she was not. 

During my first two years as mayor, I had 
no big allies. There was no one. [laughs] Boy, 
that was a rough two years, because I still had 
Bruno and Ed Spoon on the council with me, 
and they had never wanted me there to begin 
with. There were bound to be hard feelings, so 
it was very tough trying to get anything done. 

I relied a great deal on the press to get 
information to the public, such as public 
hearings. The people were my lifeline in 
the community at that time. Fortunately, 
they were serious enough about what was 
happening to show up at these hearings 
and let their feelings be known, because the 
development interests were out in force at 


every single community meeting we had. 
They spoke out in the city daily about what 
they felt should be accomplished as opposed 
to what the people felt should be restricted. 

The first meeting I had after the election 
was with the Certified Public Accountants 
group in town. We met down at the Sands, 
and I was the speaker that night. This was very 
shortly after I’d been elected—maybe only a 
week or two later. Many of them told me after 
the talk that they hadn’t thought I had known 
enough to be mayor. When we talked about 
the issues that night, a couple of things came 
out: they said I could think fast on my feet 
because I knew the background, and that I 
was an effective speaker. That gives your ego 
a bit of a boost, so the next time you’re not 
so afraid of facing this same kind of group of 
intelligent, fairly well-informed people. 

Because the office of mayor is so public, 
I attended literally hundreds of luncheons, 
dinners, and meetings, and I was active in a 
lot of commissions. I was getting a pretty good 
press, not because I think they were bending 
over one way or another, but because they 
were honestly reporting what I had said. There 
was a certain amount of resentment among 
some of the council members because of that, 
but when I had my lumps coming, they gave 
it to me, too. 

I never had a problem with the press. 
I felt that we had better have a press that 
prints things whether we like them or not. 
If they don’t tell us, who’s going to tell us? 
I’m thoroughly opposed to any kind of 
censorship, and I think a free press is vital to 
any hopes we have of retaining some of the 
democratic principles on which this country 
is supposed to operate—it doesn’t always, but 
it’s supposed to. 

I was challenged at times later on in 
some subtle ways and not so subtle ways, 



40 


Barbara Bennett 


and I do have at times a very short fuse. I 
remember one instance when Bill Wallace 
said something that really made me angry-I 
don’t remember what it was. I just jumped up 
on my chair. I think from then on there never 
was really a doubt at that table that I was going 
to defend myself and not be pushed around by 
any interests—either those sitting at the table 
or outside the council. 

When everyone on the council was 
appointed to serve on certain boards and 
commissions, I appointed myself to the 
Regional Transportation Board. That was 
because there was a critical need for improving 
our public transportation system. I served on 
that during my entire time at city hall, and that 
was the period of growth. I do not personally 
take any credit for that. Jerry Hall headed up 
the Regional Transportation Commission, 
and still does. He was very good at what 
he did—a very forceful guy. He is now the 
executive director of Citifare. Sometimes he’s 
too pushy... Jerry likes to be able to control 
everything. As a result of that, recently he’s 
had a bout with Elderport, and he’s been 
forced to make some changes which I don’t 
really approve of. 

Jerry was a great planner, and he saw the 
need for efficient public transportation. The 
Regional Transportation Commission was 
supportive of him, and government bucks were 
still available in the early days, which was a 
great help, If we were to try to get that kind of 
system on line today, I don’t think we could do 
it, because the government dollars are just not 
that available. They had a budget then that was 
designed to at least carry them through that 
year and maybe into the next year. Therefore, 
the monies didn’t diminish that quickly in 
the beginning. Ultimately, though, they did, 
because he wanted them stopped. But you don’t 
stop government budget processes overnight, 
so we continued to get some substantial 


funding, which was absolutely necessary. At 
that time, as I recall, a new bus cost $40,000. 
I would venture a guess that today that same 
bus is probably costing $65,000. 

I am satisfied with our bus system, and I 
think that generally speaking, we have one of 
the better public transportation systems going. 
The credit is largely due to Jerry Hall’s efforts. 

When I was elected m 1979,1 was the first 
publicly-elected mayor in Reno since the early 
1960s, and the first woman to ever be elected 
in the city of Reno. There was a story about it 
in Newsweek. Back in the 1960s, Bud Baker 
was a popularly elected mayor, but then the 
process changed so that we had a council- 
manager form of government. But in 1979, the 
process changed once again so that the mayor 
would be elected. I was the first mayor under 
that new system to be elected. Now we have 
a manager-council form of government, and 
the law prohibits councilmen from interfering 
in the responsibilities of a city manager. The 
city manager, under the city charter, runs the 
city. The city council members are prohibited 
from interfering in that management, which 
is certainly wrong. The city manger is not 
accountable to anyone; he is appointed by 
the council. They say it keeps politics out of 
it, but that’s asinine, because there’s always 
going to be a majority on the council who 
are of one opinion or another. That majority 
is going to rule at the council table. They’re 
going to decide who sits at the Reno Planning 
Commission, which is critical. They’re going 
to decide who is city manager; they’re going 
to decide the ordinances; they’re going to 
decide zoning laws; they’re going to decide 
everything. Of course, we have had a pro¬ 
growth council for all of those years. 

Nobody that has a majority vote is going 
to pick a city manager who advocates slow 
growth or planned growth—that’s not their 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


41 


bag. The city manager has to do what the city 
council votes for, in a sense. But at the same 
time, the council is almost solely dependent 
upon this manager to provide them with 
information about city departments. When 
the council wants to get something done, 
they have to say to the city manager, “Get 
us this information.’ And that person is in a 
position to provide that information in any 
way he sees fit. 

One of the issues that Ed Spoon had 
raised in the primary was Hank Etchemendy, 
the city manager. He felt Hank should go, 
because he wasn’t offering any leadership. Of 
course, in my opinion, it’s not up to the city 
manager to offer the leadership. That should 
be coming from the council and the mayor. It 
was either that, or perhaps he felt that Henry 
was too timid in his dealings with the council 
members. I don’t really know... I don’t recall 
that Ed ever told me what his specific reasons 
were for wanting to get rid of Etchemendy, 
other than he felt that he really wasn’t a strong 
guiding hand in there. 

Before the election I had been asked about 
it, and I said that I wasn’t in a position to make 
a judgment until I had been there and knew 
what was going on. Ed did bring it up, but it 
was not pursued immediately, because I don’t 
think that the votes were there. I think that 
Janice and Bill, along with myself, certainly 
wanted to know a little more. I don’t know 
what Joe McClelland’s position was, but I 
think that he also wanted to know a little bit 
more about the situation before we took any 
further steps. 

Ultimately I did have a problem with 
Henry. It dealt with the fact that I wanted 
some information that I hadn’t received at 
city hall. We still had a Regional Planning 
Commission at that time, and I went over 
there to talk with someone and get the 
information that I wanted. Apparently, the 


person I talked to got back to Etchemendy, 
and Etchemendy raised hell with the guy for 
giving me the information. When I found that 
out, I went to Hank and told him that I didn’t 
want anyone being told that I could not be 
provided with information that I requested. 

I didn’t have any staff that could get me 
information when I needed it. I always did it 
myself, which was one of the reasons why I 
advocated very early on for more money for 
the mayor. In the first place, it was literally 
a 12-hour-a-day job, and your weekends 
were never your own, because you were 
expected to be at a banquet or an opening 
or a ribbon cutting or someplace else. It was 
a tremendously time-consuming job, if you 
took it seriously and did the work, keeping 
in touch with the public. I went on having 
neighborhood meetings in people’s homes 
to feel them out and understand where they 
were coming from, and to listen to them as 
well as have them listen to me. So it was very 
time consuming. 

The mayor’s salary was $10,000, and that 
was the gross. That wasn’t the net, of course. 
The only expenses that I had—and I think it 
only happened on maybe two occasions—was 
when I had to take someone to lunch on city 
business. The other thing that I did submit 
was my gas expenses, because I was putting a 
tremendous amount of money into gas. That 
only reimburses you for some of the expenses. 
I never ever submitted big bills for anything, 
because I think that the public as well as the 
council made it clear that they didn’t want 
to pay the mayor any more money. I wasn’t 
about to get some of the salary that I thought 
I should be earning by submitting expense 
accounts that were outrageous. They were 
always very reasonable. 

I took the idea to the council of possibly 
having a form of government other than 



42 


Barbara Bennett 


council-manager. Of course, the defecate hit 
the fan on that one, because it was seen as a 
power play. I can understand why it would be, 
but that wasn’t what it was. 

I had developed a real distaste for the city 
manager-council form of government. That 
was because I had an opportunity to come to 
know that entirely too many of the decisions 
that were made as to how the city was and 
should be functioning were being made in 
the city manager’s office. Furthermore, the 
city charter prohibits council members—the 
mayor being one—from interfering in the 
city manager’s work, which can make it very 
difficult. 

Later on, when Chris Cherches was city 
manager, I had reason to believe that he gave 
instructions to his department heads that they 
were not to deal with me on this level, and that 
I should be dealing directly with him. I felt that 
I should be free to talk to anyone in the city hail 
that I wished, so I challenged him. I went to 
him and said, “I understand that you’ve told a 
lot of your department heads that they are not 
to deal with me. I want that order changed.” 
He kind of hangdog denied having made it, 
but shortly thereafter an order went out saying 
that they were to deal with me, but he was to 
be informed of everything that took place. 

The earlier experience with Etchemendy 
made me realize the power that city managers 
have. For instance, we ran into a lot of serious 
problems in the building department with 
very questionable behavior on the part of a 
lot of the city inspectors. If you prohibit a 
member of the council or the mayor from 
getting in there and asking these questions, 
then all of a sudden one day you read about 
it in the paper. The problem is not that the 
public is angry with the head of the building 
department or the city manager—they want 
to know why the council didn’t know these 
things. You don’t know, because they won’t 


tell you. The person who serves as the city 
manager is an unelected person with no duty 
or responsibility to the public. He or she can 
get away with those things an elected person 
cannot—or should not—be allowed to. 

I began to think that what I had always 
considered a good system really was not a 
good system. I believe that the person who 
is going to hang by his or her heels and toes 
out there where the public is concerned is the 
one that ought to be making those decisions. 
I have no problem with it being an entire 
mayor-council sort of thing, but I did not 
like this thing in the city charter that says that 
you cannot interfere with the city manager. 
That city manager should be taking orders 
from the council. He is, in a sense, but the 
council is not telling this person everything 
that should be done. If you’re just able to deal 
with a little dab—you tell him you want to 
check an ordinance or something—well, he’ll 
do those little things. But in the meanwhile 
there are a hundred other things that are 
being done in that same place that you know 
nothing about. The city manager obviously 
can’t make a report to the city council on 
everything that’s done. 

One of the goals in life of the city manager 
is to keep climbing this ladder. They go into 
one city and try to establish a reputation so 
they can move on to the next. They don’t 
have sufficient background in the history 
of the city, and knowing where a city is at 
in a particular time is not, in my opinion, a 
sufficient commitment to the interests of the 
city. So I have always felt that someone who 
was appointed and who was not accountable 
to the public should not be in the position of 
wielding as much power as the city manager 
does under our form of government. When 
I made a public statement to that effect, the 
newspaper picked up on it and was very 
heavily supportive of the city-manager form 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


43 


of government. They felt it took the kind of 
city-of-Chicago-politics out of it and made it 
more professional. There is some truth in that. 

However, about that same time they 
did a very flattering story on the mayor of 
Baltimore, and how successful he had been in 
doing wonderful things for the city. I found 
it very ironic because he headed up a strong 
mayor form of government and was able to 
get things down. Of course, I responded to 
the newspaper. I said that that was precisely 
one of my points, because he had the power 
to make things move like that; therefore, he 
was really a more effective person to head up 
the city government as city manager. But I also 
knew that there was very little likelihood that 
this would get passed by the council, because 
I was still only one of seven with a vote. 

I felt strongly about this issue, regardless 
of whether or not it would happen in the 
future—it was something we should seriously 
think about at the very least, we ought 
to change the city charter so that council 
members would have more authority in 
city government. One of the ways that I 
felt that that could be accomplished was by 
assigning a member of each council to a major 
department. For instance, a member of the 
council would be responsible for the police, 
fire, building, or planning departments—that 
sort of thing. Part of their job would be to 
know everything that was going on there. 
They in turn would keep the council fully 
informed, knowing full well that they would 
be responsible to the voting public for what 
was going on. This arrangement could end a 
situation which I saw arise many times when 
someone would ask a question and I would 
say, “I don’t know, you’ll have to ask the city 
manager.” That’s embarrassing as well as 
frustrating. 

When running for office, council members 
would understand that that was going to be 


one of their functions as a council member. 
If they were unwilling to fill that role, if they 
didn’t have the time for it or the inclination, 
obviously they should not be running for 
office. The public, as well as other council 
members, would have a right to expect that 
of them. 

When I proposed an increase in salary 
for the mayor, I also proposed one for the 
council members, who were making $9,000 at 
that time. I recall making the statement that if 
someone were hired to head up a business— 
as I had been elected supposedly to head up 
the City of Reno—and he agreed to work for 
$10,000, the employer would not hire him. 
They would feel that if that was all that person 
was worth, they didn’t want him. 

Most people operated under the 
impression that it was not a full-time job. 
It was a citizen form of government in 
which you should not expect to be overly 
compensated. But such a low salary limits the 
kinds of people who can or who are willing 
to run for office. You either have to have a 
substantial income or outside savings so that 
you don’t need that income as a part of your 
everyday living expenses. It either has to be 
that or elect someone who is retired and can 
survive on their income. A bad alternative is 
to hire a person who has a full-time job, and 
consequently does not have the time to put 
into his elected position 

Sparks has now raised its salary for 
its mayor, and so has Reno. The county 
commission members are also considerably 
better compensated. They’re a bit more 
realistic now—like, the mayor is making 
$18,000 now. That’s an 80 percent increase 
over what it was. Pete Sferrazza, the present 
mayor of Reno, has a law practice. I suppose 
between the two jobs, he makes an adequate 
living. But that’s not a judgment that I am 
prepared to make, because I still think that if 



44 


Barbara Bennett 


the people of the city want a full-time mayor, 
then they’d better be willing to pay that 
person’s salary In my opinion, the $18,000 
would still have to be doubled in order to 
make it right. 

During my campaign, I had told the 
public the things that I wanted to do, so when 
I got in office there were no real surprises. 
I wanted Reno to have its own Planning 
Commission. We had a Regional Planning 
Commission at the time, but everything 
was breezing through them, just like it was 
breezing through the Reno City Council. So I 
felt that we had to have a gaming policy. I felt 
that the public should have an opportunity to 
be heard on the matter, and that their wishes 
should be, to the very best of our ability, 
respected in trying to develop a growth policy 
in this community. 

At that time Harrah’s wanted approval to 
expand and add a tower. I knew that the kind 
of expansion that Harrah’s was looking for was 
precisely the thing that the public didn’t want 
any more of at that time. And if the public had 
had a chance to vote on it, it would have been 
overwhelmingly defeated. 

Early on in my mayoral term I got a lot of 
heat from the hotel-casino industry, because 
they really felt that I was on their backs. I 
always recognized that economically they 
were the major contributors to the tax base in 
this state, and they provided so many jobs, so 
it wasn’t that at all. I never hated the gaming, 
and I don’t to this day. This state has made 
a choice that this is where they want to be, 
and I think the people are satisfied with that. 
What they don’t want is to sacrifice what they 
see as their quality of life in order to expand 
that industry. 

Early on the casino people really thought 
that I was anti-casino, and it was difficult 
to convince them that I wasn’t. Eventually, 


though, I think that in that area of business in 
the city, they began to trust me and to believe 
what I was saying. I also developed a better 
understanding of the problems that they had 
to deal with. It became a sort of comfortable 
relationship at least. But they never affected 
my votes at the table, because I was still 
opposed to a lot of expansion. 

The development community was another 
matter. Same areas of the business community 
were on my back constantly, charging me with 
being responsible for a no-growth attitude. 
I’d been taking a lot of what I thought were 
undeserved shots. But I have also realized 
that these same interests are still making it 
very difficult to get anything done in this 
community. 

There was a story in the paper that I had 
actively dissuaded some desirable industries 
from locating in this community, which 
infuriated me because it was a flat-out lie. Bill 
Myers, I believe, owned the largest real estate 
company in town at that time. I was told by a 
member of his staff that he said I had literally 
turned away several businesses that were 
interested in settling in Reno. I really hit the 
ceiling when I heard it, because it was untrue. 
Completely untrue. It apparently had come 
out of a remark make by Ernie Martinelli, 
who was a banker don in Las Vegas. I don’t 
know whether he was in print or had made a 
speech or what, but he apparently made the 
claim that I had intentionally diverted several 
businesses from coming into the state, which, 
as I said, was just a gross he. 

I called Bill Myers into the office to tell 
him what I thought about it, and I challenged 
him at that time to go public and name these 
businesses that I had supposedly turned away. 
He did nothing, but the rumors persisted. I 
went to the press with it and told them what 
had happened and challenged Martinelli 
or Myers to come up with a list of these 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


45 


businesses. But they wouldn’t say which 
industries, because it was a lie. 

In turn, I charged them with generating 
exactly that climate, which they tried to 
blame me for. They repeatedly made these 
allegations about me, but they were in fact 
telling an untruth to somebody out there who 
wasn’t going to want to come into this area. 
I was really furious. I said, “Either put up or 
shut up, because this isn’t true.” That was the 
last I heard of it from that particular group. 
Those two were probably more minor players 
in the efforts to get me out of city hall from 
the day I arrived. But the charges were always 
present. 

As mayor, my main concern was the 
growth issue and the multiple issues within 
it, such as the availability of water, water 
quality, air quality, and affordable housing. 
Outside of growth, I felt that we needed a 
far stronger ethics policy. I also felt that the 
people of the city had to be brought more into 
government participation—in other words, 
citizen participation. I felt that we definitely 
needed a broader-based level of boards and 
commissions, because they had been so 
heavily oriented in the direction of whatever 
they were dealing with. There were very few 
women, practically no minorities, so there 
needed to be more balance put into that. 

In a lot of areas, I enjoyed a degree of 
success. One area was the Civil Service 
Commission, which deals with the city and 
with city employees. In the past, it appeared 
to have been the attitude that businessmen 
were the best equipped to understand those 
problems. I felt that had to change, because 
the city also had a problem with its affirmative 
action hiring policies that eventually had to 
be dealt with through a court order. The city 
hired at least as many women as men, so I 
made recommendations which put Bernice 
Martin, a black woman who was a nurse, on 


the Civil Service Commission. We also put 
Carlos Romo, a man who was Hispanic and 
had his doctoral degree, on the commission. 
The city is full of people who are qualified 
who are not only business people. I think 
that was proved time and again in many of 
the appointments that I recommended and 
were approved by the council 

But I had lots of other problems with the 
council, particularly when it came to power on 
boards and commissions, such as the Airport 
Authority. There were battles over that. I 
felt that it needed a citizen representative, 
because the representatives were flyers or 
owned their own airplanes or had that kind 
of interest in things. I fought for it, but was 
not able to accomplish that for a long time 
until I ultimately had Jean Stoess appointed. 
Jean, of course, was a very competent person, 
and brought the citizen point of view to the 
board at that time. 

The group that always gave me fits, 
that I was never able to deal with, was the 
Planning Commission. Once we had a 
planning commission, I simply was not able 
to get anyone who felt as I did about growth 
or who was even moderate about it. I really 
wanted planning commission people to at 
least be middle-of-the-roaders. The result 
of the early Reno Planning Commission 
was that they were just gung-ho on growth, 
and they reflected the attitudes of the people 
who appointed them from the council. That’s 
exactly what it amounted to. Since I was the 
only advocate of moderating growth, it was 
always a six-to-one vote. 

For instance, if you had people appointed 
who were in the nursery business in a very 
modest way, all of a sudden they got to be 
huge nurseries. There were also architects 
and other people in development. Then you 
obviously had firms that built or repaired 
streets, and engineering firms that worked 



46 


Barbara Bennett 


with them. Those were the kinds of people 
that were getting appointed to the planning 
commission, with a few exceptions. I was 
able to get a couple of people, but I was never 
able to get a majority that really felt the need 
to slow down growth and to say no to a lot 
of developments that I believed were very 
unwise. 

The Planning Commission was just a 
body that made recommendations; however, I 
don’t know how many times I heard members 
of the council say, “Well, I do not want to go 
against the recommendation of the Planning 
Commission.” They said, “We’ve appointed 
this commission. If we don’t listen to them, 
why have them?” All the while they have 
the prerogative of appointing someone who 
comes from the exact position that they do, 
which is frustrating. 

Frustrating is not a word that I especially 
like to use publicly, but I did then, because 
it was like being stuck between a rock and a 
hard place. You knew what had to be done, 
but you didn’t have the votes to get it done 
and couldn’t sway anyone. No one on the 
council moved in that first year with a few 
exceptions. Janice Pine and Bill Wallace 
occasionally opposed something, or at least 
tried to alter something, but otherwise it 
was just right down the line—’’we’re going to 
approve everything.” 

Of the people on city council, Bill Wallace 
and Janice Pine always did their homework. 
When Ed Oaks was on the council, Ed was 
considered the financial expert. He had a very 
lengthy banking background, so he could deal 
with financial questions that came to the table. 
But I doubt if Ed ever looked at his packet of 
issues outside of the economic concerns. His 
votes strongly echoed the fact that in Ed’s 
mind, the economy took absolute first place 
over all of the other concerns—whether it 
was water, too much growth too fast, lack of 


housing, or anything. He just simply came 
from the philosophy that economics came 
first. 

As far as Bruno and Ed Spoon were 
concerned, I don’t recall whether they 
opposed anything, because it’s been over eight 
years since I worked with them. I can’t say 
absolutely that they never opposed anything, 
because they may well have. But certainly the 
overwhelming numbers of their votes—and 
all the council votes, as a matter of fact—were 
six to one. For instance, they were six to one 
for expansion of Harrah’s; they were six to 
one for approval of the Peppermill, though 
it had not been approved initially; they also 
approved the Gold Dust, which, thank God, 
never got off the ground downtown. The 
Gold Dust was an absolute mish-mash job, 
where they’d taken old rooms and given them 
approval for the 100 rooms needed to build 
a casino in Reno. Ugh! With 500 rooms, the 
Gold Dust at that time would have required 
11 more police officers, another police car, 
probably, and an additional $400,000 in 
school costs. It would’ve created 70 more tons 
of air pollutants in an area which was already 
heavily polluted. It would’ve also increased the 
population by 958 people, according to the 
numbers that were given to me at the time. 

The Florentine was another proposed 
hotel-casino that they didn’t proceed with. 
Economically they weren’t equipped to build 
the thing. 

Some of the casinos were low quality 
places. For a while some people were talking 
about Reno concentrating on having only 
high quality casinos that would attract 
wealthier people. Hut I don’t believe that that’s 
a decision government should be involved 
in. It’s responsibility is to make sure that 
whatever project comes in can be supported 
by resources in the area and is not going to be 
a detriment in any way. Those are the things 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


47 


government should deal with. If somebody 
wants to build a place that is less than upbeat, 
that decision is theirs. 

In mid-1979 we began talking and hearing 
about the MGM Grand expansion. It was a 
very large expansion they wanted—almost 
1,000 rooms, as I recall. MGM knew that 
they were going to have trouble with this, 
because the council was talking about the 
sewer problem and how much it would 
take to accommodate the expansion. The 
Regional Planning Commission had put out 
information dealing with the problems of air 
quality in that area, and how many new traffic 
trips a day they were expecting and so forth. 
This was towards the end of October. 

I questioned the wisdom of the MGM 
expansion because of the limited water supply. 
I didn’t want the community to be put in the 
position of subsidizing future hotel-casino 
growth through higher water rates, because 
Sierra Pacific had come in just a few weeks 
before this and said that we’d have a water 
shortage in 1981 and 1982. Then all of a 
sudden they came back and softened it. They 
said the water supply was sufficient. But the 
state water engineer’s office said at that time 
that just the subdivisions and condos that 
had already been approved exceeded Sierra 
Pacific’s water availability at that time. 

On top of its water requirements, the 
MGM expansion would require 92,800 daily 
gallons of sewer capacity. The city then had 
only 60,000 gallons of capacity, if I remember 
right. Then the MGM had some kind of a plan 
where it was going to give up some fixtures in 
the hotel to get the additional sewer capacity it 
needed. Sewage capacity was really short then, 
and we weren’t due to finish this expanded 
sewer plan for about two more years. There 
was an allocation plan, so that the city could 
only allocate so much in a quarter. So the 
MGM contributed half a million dollars to 


the sewer collateral plan so that they would 
be assured of the necessary sewage capacity. 
The council was told by the city attorney that 
he doubted that it was legal, but the council 
went ahead and approved it, anyway. 

When I was running for office, I had 
spoken out against the sewer collateral plan. 
I felt it was giving unfair advantage to a select 
group of area developers at the expense of 
other people, who would have to sit and wait 
for sewage while the developers went ahead 
and did all their building. Who would know 
if any resources would be left by the time 
they got through? At any rate, it ultimately 
was found to be illegal by the attorney 
general’s office. An opinion was rendered that 
ultimately did away with it, which I thought 
all along would be the case. 

The MGM was looking at hiring 1,400 
new people who were going to need housing 
and places to shop. Based on all these facts, 
the planning commission voted seven to two 
against recommending expansion. Thank 
goodness there was somebody at that time 
wise enough to say, “Hey, we can’t handle 
this now...” But then the council had already 
approved an early start for Harrah’s. In other 
words, they gave them approval to go ahead 
before they knew the sewer capacity would 
be available, and the same kind of a situation 
then arose again in the MGM thing. We were 
into what I considered a deficit spending of 
water, and a deficit spending of sewer. If you 
think deficit spending in the U.S. Government 
is awful, when you start into deficit spending 
where life-sustaining resources are concerned, 
you’ve really got a problem. 

In fact, the city of Sparks filed a lawsuit 
against us in June of 1979 when I had been 
at the council for a few weeks. They were 
suing Reno over reckless allocation of sewer 
capacity as it related to the hotel-casino early 
starts. They were upset about it. Here we had 



48 


Barbara Bennett 


another city entity that could recognize the 
stupidity in this because they were dealing 
with growth problems similar to ours, but the 
city council was still ignoring them! 

These things were pretty discouraging, 
and this made me more firmly resolved to 
keep on this path and to make them have to 
deal with these votes next time they came up 
for election. It made me absolutely convinced 
that I would not hesitate to remind the public 
of this when it was necessary That was the 
only recourse I had to those actions to which 
the majority of the people in this community 
were opposed. Sometimes people would come 
down to the meetings and back me up and 
give support. 

When the city council was discussing the 
MGM Grands bid for expansion, I went to 
talk with MGM’s chairman, Barry Brunette. 
We hadn’t even exchanged a dozen words, 
and Mr. Brunette said that they would be 
willing to provide day care. I don’t think it 
would have been free, but instead would have 
been maybe low cost, based on the employee’s 
ability to pay. MGM also agreed and did put 
up $400,000 for low-cost housing. 

When the day care issue came to the 
Reno City Council, there was a lot of dispute 
or argument over it. Apparently, many of the 
area businesses saw this as a precedent-setting 
step. I had a strong sense that these businesses 
had been in touch with a number of the 
council members, because all of a sudden at 
the council table, we got this argument that 
we shouldn’t be forcing businesses to do this 
kind of thing. The interesting point about this 
was that Reno was written up in a national 
magazine at that time. It was an individual 
publication about top firm people that deal 
with child care. The article praised the city of 
Reno for attempting to move in this direction. 
Here we had MGM saying they’re willing 


to do it, and the council wouldn’t approve 
it. That did it in. This was the first council I 
worked with, before Peter and Florence came 
on, but the issue still exists today. We even 
have Barbara Vucanovich, our conservative 
Republican Congresswoman, talking in 
terms of child care and admitting that there’s 
a problem. 

Businesses that provide child care across 
the country have known for years that it 
has been beneficial to them. They have less 
absenteeism for which they have to pay-, they 
have less employee turnover; they have fewer 
problems all around. So it has not been a 
major, costly item for them in doing business. 
I think that with some foresight on the part 
of the council, we could’ve had that start, but 
it went down the tube. 

One of the things that was very 
troublesome to me was that prior to 1981, 
the council almost automatically approved 
extensions to building projects which were 
sitting on the waiting list because there had 
been a recession at the time. If they were not 
building, it wasn’t because they didn’t have 
approvals—they did, even though they kept 
blaming me as though they didn’t, [laughs] 
But the fact was that they didn’t want to build 
because there was a recession during that 
time. Costs were too much to build and so 
they were coming in and getting approvals, 
and leaving these things sit on the shelf until 
they were ready to go. That was happening, 
so we had this huge backlog of approved 
projects. 

Falcon’s Nest was the first real test... It was 
like a 500-unit condo that now sits out in the 
north end of town-that cement monstrosity. 
About a month after I arrived at city hail, 
Falcon’s Nest representatives came back to get 
an extension, and I didn’t want to give it to 
them. Janice Pine had voted against it in the 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


49 


first place. At any rate, the owner threatened 
to sue. If memory serves me right, he never 
did. I can’t remember whether he was from 
an outside area. I think he was, because a lot 
of them built out in other areas, went as far 
as they could, and then moved in here. When 
they finished here, they’d move on someplace 
else. 

There was that problem on the South 
Virginia strip cropping up more and more, 
too, because there had been a lot of approvals 
granted out there. Fortunately, many of them 
to this day have not been built. That only 
alludes to the problem I touched on earlier. 
Here were all these projects that had been 
approved, but you couldn’t guess that they 
weren’t going to be followed through. You 
can’t keep allocating waters that have already 
been given to someone else. If a project is not 
going to be completed, it should be taken off 
the list and kicked loose. Then it should have 
to be approved once again. 

The county had approved a lot of big 
projects out on the south end of town, and 
there were a lot of other developments that 
were going in—like, Harrah’s owned property 
out there. They were talking about this huge 
development out quite a ways. Then there was 
another talk involving Hilton. But Harrah’s 
owned property out there at that time. When 
Meadowood and some of those buildings in 
that area went in, a property on ideal corner 
lots was all being saved for something, It 
was always my opinion that if gaming was 
permitted to go out there, that’s what it would 
be used for: big casinos all the way out. 

The community had been talking for a 
long time about downtown redevelopment. 
I know Moya Lear and I walked through 
some of those areas one day trying to get a 
sense of what could be done, what kind of 
recommendations to make, and who wanted 
committees to work on these different things. 


It really did need upgrading, and still does. I 
pushed for redevelopment in the downtown 
area. I must say that the plan as it is evolving 
now is not what I had in mind, but it is an 
improvement and there should be more 
to come. There were some of us who felt 
that there ought to be more of a mall-type 
appearance on Virginia Street. Businesses 
themselves did not want that. I think that 
there were those who were concerned about 
how we would get taxi cabs and buses in and 
out of there. 

Some downtown redevelopment took 
place before I left. The downtown interests 
had to get their heads together and decide 
what they were willing to settle on. It was 
probably less elaborate than originally 
planned; however, it’s turning out to be 
more costly than the initial estimates were. I 
know that we talked in terms of $30 million, 
which was not going to come out of the 
general budget in the city. It was going to 
be paid for by a property tax collected from 
the tax increment district in the downtown 
area. This tax base was to be used to pay for 
downtown redevelopment. Then Harrah’s 
Auto Collection got into it, as did a very 
active local group, headed up by Ben Dasher. 
They put a lot of time and effort into saving 
Harrah’s Auto Collection and putting it in 
downtown Reno, which I agreed was a good 
idea. I’m still not sure how the funding is 
working because we’re still working on that. 
We know it’s going. I don’t know whether it’s 
going to look like the initial architectural and 
landscaping plans that we saw. I don’t know 
what’s going to happen, but it will be an asset 
in downtown Reno. 

We also looked at the possibility of 
acquiring the post office on Mill and South 
Virginia, which is no longer the main branch 
in Reno. But the government wasn’t interested, 
at least at that time, and I don’t suppose they 



50 


Barbara Bennett 


are now. Of course, it’s a building that the 
taxpayers paid for initially. They ought to just 
give it back to the city. It is a nice building and 
with the Mapes there, they could’ve had a lot 
of nice shops and things done with it. 

There were also plans to do things with the 
river, and there still are. Of course, whatever is 
done with the river in downtown Reno should 
not interfere with the ability of the water to 
flow through this community, because it’s a 
source of drinking water and it is our lifeline. 
Any plans with that river have to be very 
carefully handled. 

Some interesting things happen when 
you walk door-to-door on your own behalf. 
I’ll never forget one man who had a small 
business of his own. We were talking about 
growth in the area and he was talking about 
politicians who were “on the take.” I said to 
him, “Well, that is never going to happen 
with me.” 

He says, “Don’t give me that crap, lady. 
When you get there you’re going to be like all 
the rest of them.” [laughs] I never forgot that 
man. He lived right over near us. I saw and 
heard more of that attitude as I went along. 
People go off and vote but they honestly 
believe that everybody who is elected is going 
to be a crook. They really do. I think that I 
was able to dispel this. I think that it was one 
of the greatest services that I provided to this 
community during my term of office: I came 
to be known as being honest, I could not be 
bought, and I did not change my attitudes or 
opinions. 

Someone wrote in an editorial that I 
softened my attitude about gaming after I took 
office because I had come to understand how 
the gaming community functions. There is 
some truth in that—a little bit. I did come to 
understand what their role in a community 
is, and what I thought it ought to be. I also 


thought that we were far more of a one- 
industry state at that point in time, with all 
our eggs in one basket. If gaming ever went 
sour, and California or some other place 
picked up on it, we could be faced with some 
very serious problems. I also understood the 
gaming industry’s limitations in its ability to 
make money. 

There are a lot of things that they still 
do which I disapprove of wholeheartedly, 
and I have never softened my attitude about 
building hotel-casinos. Nor have I changed 
my mind on the subject of expanding while 
only having limited resources. 

Bruno Menicucci, Marcel Durant and 
Clyde Biglieri were running for re-election 
to the city council at the time that I was 
running for mayor. They all had very pro¬ 
growth voting records: they had approved 
the MGM, the Florentine, the Peppermill, the 
Sundowner, the Eldorado, the Sands, Circus 
Circus, Harold’s, and Harrah’s addition. Some 
of these recommendations had been made 
against the approval of the Regional Planning 
Commission. 

The Regional Planning Commission 
was comprised of people from all three 
local government entities: Washoe County, 
Sparks, and the city of Reno, with each entity 
appointing one or two people —I’ve forgotten 
the precise number—to this board. At any 
rate, at that time it was not a body that was 
controlled entirely by the majority of Reno 
City Council members as the Reno City 
Planning Commission eventually became. 

I appointed myself to the Planning 
Commission right after I was elected. They 
had a planning staff, which was beginning 
to formulate a lot of reasonable questions 
about traffic congestion, air quality, and 
about the resources in the community and 
how they should be allocated. That was an 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


51 


attitude that never really gained acceptance 
at the Reno council table. I don’t know how 
they expected planning to take place without 
knowing, for instance, how much water you 
had, or how much of that you wanted to 
allocate to economic diversification. They 
also didn’t discuss how much water it would 
take to provide new homes and the related 
businesses that would move into a community 
as a result. There would be new businesses 
like barber shops, grocery stores, shopping 
centers—all of these things that come in, 
creating a humongous need for water, as the 
kids would say. 

The water question has been kicking 
around for years and years and years, and I 
finally reached the conclusion that the people 
who wield power and who had great interest 
in developing this community were only 
going to be satisfied with the kind of water 
numbers that they could generate themselves. 
For instance, if I’m running a business and I 
hire someone to do a study for me, and if that 
person comes back with a highly negative 
study, chances are I’m not going to listen to 
him. I’m going to find somebody who is going 
to tell me what I want to hear. I reached the 
conclusion that that was taking place. 

I think that in a way, those who were 
already on the council—like Bruno, Spoon, 
Ed Oaks and Bill Granata—already had a 
mindset before I ever arrived at city hall. I 
think that the people who wielded influence— 
particularly those with an economic interest 
in growth in the city of Reno—were already 
certain of where they stood. So once I arrived, 
I don’t feel they had to influence them any 
more at all. I think then the job was to get 
the new council members into their corner. 

Ed Oaks passed away when he was on 
the city council and we had to approve a new 
member. As I recall, there were about 26 


serious applications that we’d gone through 
as people applied for the post. When it came 
time to make an appointment, I nominated 
Barbara Weinberg, who’s very bright. She 
was a Republican, but I didn’t care, because 
I knew she could do the job. Besides, it was 
a non-partisan office. Bill Wallace, I think, 
nominated Jim Thornton, and Janice Pine 
nominated John Francis, who was a banker. 
She was interested in him because Oaks had 
been a banker, if my memory serves me, and 
she felt that another man of that caliber would 
be useful in that position. 

We were unable to really move off base, 
because everybody was staying only with their 
own nominees. We went through three votes, 
I think, and Janice dropped her nomination 
of Francis and moved over and supported 
Jim Thornton. Jim didn’t have enough votes, 
because he still had just Bill and Janice. I was 
the only one supporting Barbara, so nobody 
had four votes. Then Stan Greene’s name 
somehow got in acre—I think Ed Spoon 
nominated him. Stan Greene was the manager 
of the Old Town Mall on South Virginia at 
the time. His name all of a sudden popped 
up with support from Spoon, Menicucci, 
and McClelland. There were only six of us, 
so that would have been the three. He wound 
up with three votes and Francis was gone so 
then we had three votes for Greene, two for 
Jim Thornton, and one for Barbara. I knew I 
wasn’t going to pick up any votes for her. 

Everyone had been interviewed by 
the council in personnel sessions. I don’t 
remember whether they were open sessions, 
but I guess under the law they had to be. I had 
never even considered Greene, and I had to 
delay the vote to find out more about him. I 
did know that he was serving on the Citizen 
Policy Planning Advisory Committee, which 
was really a citizen’s group that I had had good 
faith in. They did have a lot of social concerns 



52 


Barbara Bennett 


and were making what I thought were good 
recommendations. That was all I knew or was 
able to find out about Stan Greene. But since 
I knew where the other two were, I switched 
my vote and made the fourth vote for Stan 
Greene. 

Once that vote was cast, I saw a number 
of developers in the audience stand up and 
practically cheer, and they were patting each 
other on the back. I got suckered. Bill Wallace 
had changed his vote, too. He and I must 
have come to the same recognition about the 
same time, because he came into my office 
later on and he was mad at himself; and I 
was furious with myself. I felt we’d really been 
suckered, and we were, believe me! The thing 
that made me so angry with myself is that the 
people who had been supporting Greene— 
McClelland, Spoon and Menicucci—were 
the people that were voting in the opposite 
direction from me on everything. So I should 
have suspected something. It make me so mad 
that I was so dumb that I didn’t get it, and Bill 
felt the same way...oh, boy! 

There was a time when Ed Spoon had 
made comments about my leadership ability. 
He had never wanted me there and I beat him 
for mayor, so obviously he didn’t have kind 
feelings toward me. He said it was the mayors 
job to be more communicative and cohesive 
with the council. My attitude was that I wasn’t 
there to be more cohesive with the council, 
with which I had very little in common where 
the future of the city was concerned. I saw 
my charge to be true to the things that I had 
advocated when I ran for office, and to the 
mandate that the voters had given me. When 
you have that kind of a schism, it is very hard 
to find much which you can agree upon. 

Janice Pine and some of the members of the 
council were quoted in a newspaper article as 
saying they were concerned that I was getting 


prior commitments on votes from Florence 
Lehners and Peter Sferrazza. They obviously 
concluded that I wouldn’t have supported 
them if I didn’t think they were going to be 
there when I needed them for a vote. I was so 
surprised at this, because I really never traded 
votes—never a single vote, Essentially that kind 
of an attitude makes me a very poor politician 
in the eyes of the people. Quid pro quo is how 
the system works, and I have never been able 
to deal with making a trade. 

In the first place, if you were inclined to 
that sort of thing, you would only be making 
trades for important things. If someone 
wanted my vote on something that was 
important to them, they’re not going to settle 
in return for some little pee-diddling item. 
They would want my vote on something. But 
I couldn’t see operating this way, because 
these things were all so tied together. I could 
not give up my attitude about water or, for 
instance, a two percent rate of growth that was 
not to be compounded annually in exchange 
for a vote to keep out a Gold Dust! Besides, I 
shouldn’t have to trade off something else—I 
don’t care what it is. I understand that’s how 
politics works, but I just cannot deal with it. 
Having really come to grips with that, I know 
I will never run for office because it does 
inhibit your effectiveness. In my opinion, 
vote-trading is unethical. Despite what some 
of the people on the council thought about 
this vote-trading thing, it was not going on. 
None of them approached me about it. If they 
had, I would have made it clear that it wasn’t. 

I started work on an ethics law in 1980. 
Common Cause, a national organization, 
has always been a major leader in honest 
government I was a member of Common 
Cause off and on, but I don’t think I was right 
at that time. They had facilities available to 
provide information on ordinances that had 
been passed in other communities. I told 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


53 


them that I wanted samples of good ethics 
codes in those communities where they had 
been challenged by law. We weren’t going 
to put anything in writing that could be 
overturned because it was illegal. At any rate, 
it took them a while to compile. There were 
ordinances from the East Coast and from 
Arizona. I had about a good half-dozen, very 
comprehensive, court-tested ethics laws. 

We had an ethics law in the state of 
Nevada, but it was really nothing. I don’t know 
when it was passed, but I would imagine it had 
been on the books for ages. To this day, they 
try to make changes down at the legislature 
in ethics legislation, and it’s difficult to get 
those people who have to live under the law 
to accept anything tougher than what’s already 
on the books. Politicians are great about 
discussing ethics, so long as they don’t have 
to adhere to them. 

Louis Test was the city attorney at that 
time, and I really didn’t want to have to draft 
this thing myself because I wanted to make 
sure it was all right. I did study law, and I think 
I had a good sense of what we wanted to do 
legally in Reno that had been tested elsewhere. 
I knew what I wanted in an ethics code that I 
considered critical to any ethics code. When 
I got all these papers together. I made a rough 
draft of what I wanted and asked the attorney 
to draft an initial ordinance, which is the route 
I suppose one is expected to go through in 
order to get something like that accomplished. 
Several months later I got this copy out of the 
city attorney’s office. He had assigned it to an 
assistant district attorney, and in my opinion, 
it was absolute garbage. It was barely an iota 
tougher than the existing state law. If we were 
going to go with something like that, we didn’t 
need to do it at city hall-we already had that. 
I just gave up in despair and decided to draft 
it myself. That took a lot of time putting it 
together. 


After I came up with a draft, Louis Test 
didn’t say anything. Louis was an elected 
official and he didn’t have to do anything that 
he didn’t want to do. It wouldn’t have done me 
any good to say. “Louis, I don’t like this. Write 
a tougher ordinance.” It may have been that 
he really felt the draft was too tough, or that 
he didn’t want to antagonize the votes which 
he could still count on in city council. But 
whatever his reasons, he was never unpleasant 
about it. 

In May of 1982, this thing had already 
been in the works for about a year. At that 
time, it went into the hands of the council, 
at which time they decided they had to have 
some workshops with it. I gave them the draft 
to read prior to the time that we went to any 
work sessions or meetings so that they would 
know what it was all about. 

After the draft was reviewed, I immediately 
ran into some major objections, mostly from 
Janice Pine and Jim Thornton. Janice Pine, 
for instance, said she felt the state law was 
adequate. And it wasn’t. I think she objected 
mostly because of the gifts and trusts that were 
involved. Thornton’s problems also had to 
deal with the trusts and the fact that he didn’t 
think that morality could be legislated. But I 
think they had trust interests and didn’t want 
to have to disclose them. That’s an argument 
that comes up all the time when it comes to 
an ethics law. But the fact is that they didn’t 
like the idea that, for instance, members of 
the family also had to file financial statements, 
and this true of every good ethics law in the 
country. It’s so obvious why. 

Some of that went on in this city: if you 
had a little something not quite as neat as you 
would want the public to know about it, you 
put it in somebody’s name in the family. I had 
a hard time getting disclosure accepted, and 
I had a time with the trusts. One of Janice’s 
explanations for not wanting to provide 



54 


Barbara Bennett 


information on family members’ finances was 
that she thought it would make her children 
targets for kidnapping and blackmail. I never 
could understand that reasoning. 

Janices lack of support on the bill as it was 
initially presented did not come as a surprise 
to me, because I was aware of the kinds of 
interests she had. I knew where a lot of her 
money in the election had come from. If you 
know these things, you know the people who 
get money from all of these interests don’t like 
having to report, because someone has said 
to them, “Hey, I’ll give you some money, but 
I don’t want my name...” That’s what’s wrong 
with the money situation in government, 
and certainly was not just at the Reno City 
Council table. It’s been in government across 
the board. 

The ethics law that did come out said that 
candidates seeking municipal office in Reno 
would have to disclose the source of every 
campaign contribution. That’s what ultimately 
came out. My initial presentation of this code 
had required that everything over $50 be 
disclosed. Jim Thornton got a little pushed 
with this and said, “Well, if we’re going to do 
it for $50, let’s make them require everything.” 

I said, “That’s fine with me.” 

Then he took another tack and said, 
“All right, if we do that, then we ought to 
include volunteers’.’ In other words if a person 
volunteered to walk, man a telephone, or 
something else, you would show that as a 
contribution. I think that he hoped that that 
would turn me away from the whole thing. 

While I thought it was pretty ridiculous, I 
said, “All right, if that’s the only way I can get 
it, we’ll do it that way.” I really had a struggle 
trying to get this deal. 

I had to make some concessions that I 
really didn’t like to make, either. For instance, 
gifts only had to be disclosed if they came 


from the immediate Reno area. That’s 
ridiculous. One example—and this is only 
an example—of what might happen, is this: 
somebody here on the Reno council deals 
with the business interest in some roundabout 
way, and this person in Reno says, “Well, I 
can’t do anything for you here in Reno because 
it’ll be on the books, but I’ve got a great piece 
of property up at the lake that’s yours for half 
price.” Those are the way these things take 
place and, in my opinion, the public is entitled 
to know. I believe that very strongly. 

Now we’re going through a big hassle back 
in Washington with these very kinds of things. 
The public’s right to know takes preference 
over a candidate’s or an incumbent’s right 
to privacy. Anyone that feels that they must 
have that much privacy with their financial 
doings ought not to be running for or sitting 
in a public office. If they don’t want the public 
to know, then don’t run. Of course they 
say, “Well, it discourages good people from 
running.” It does not discourage good, honest 
people from running at all. 

Another thing that the ethics law did was 
to prohibit local public officials from acting on 
matters in which they had a direct financial 
interest. The state law deals with that in a little 
better manner now, too, incidentally. At any 
time when you had a financial interest, all you 
had to do was just disclose the fact that you 
had it, and then you could go ahead and vote. 
I will say, however, that I don’t remember that 
happening—anyone disclosing something 
and then voting on it anyway. 

The ethics law did pass, except Jim 
Thornton voted against it and the Associated 
General Contractors were against it, too. The 
AGC was a major contributor to campaigns, 
and the newspaper publishes where these 
contributions come from. If the public is not 
as aware or up to date on these facts, then they 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


55 


can find out at that time. They know that the 
AGC pours some of the money into—and this 
is just an example, again—into a Thornton, or 
into a Menicucci, or into a Spoon...they know 
who is putting money into those candidates. 
I don’t care whether it’s to local, county, state, 
or even federal people—they say, “That does 
not buy anything.” That is the biggest bunch of 
garbage, because we know it buys something; 
we know it does! All you have to do is take 
a look at the voting records in Washington: 
the PACs [Political Action Committees] are 
pouring monies in there by the tons, and 
you go see if anybody who accepted money 
from them voted against what they wanted. 
If you or anyone in your family has any kind 
of financial interest, you cannot vote on this 
thing—that’s the way it should be. 

I think that getting the ethics law passed 
was important, I really do. I think getting 
planning into the city of Reno forced the 
public, businesses, and everyone in this 
community to look at planning not as 
something evil, but as something beneficial 
to everyone if done properly. Progress has 
been made with planning, but there are still 
so many weak areas that I almost despair at 
times. It seems as though we’ll never bring 
all the pieces together. We need to look at 
projects not in and of themselves, but in a 
cumulative way. 

There are many cities that have passed 
tough planning ordinances. The one in 
Petaluma, California, was taken all the way 
to the Supreme Court, because they were 
putting major restrictions on growth. But 
one of the problems with an ordinance is 
that it can be changed, and Reno’s has been 
changed. Some of the changes were good, and 
some were not. If I were to get involved in this 
thing now—which I can’t, because of personal 
reasons—I would not attempt to accomplish 


things through an ordinance at city hall or the 
state. I would go to an initiative petition, and 
force it that way. 

In January, 1981, I had triple-bypass 
surgery, but I wasn’t off work that long. 
Everything went very well. I’ve always been a 
hard charger, and I worked the mayor’s job in 
the same way, so it wasn’t any stress of the job 
that did it. Rather, it was an accumulation of 
a lot of things. I had had a heart attack years 
before. They weren’t sure if I had another heart 
attack and they didn’t want to wait to find 
out. They took me in for the tests right away, 
and when they found that my arteries were 
all plugged up, they wanted me in surgery as 
soon as possible. Nine days later I was ready to 
go back to work. I really felt fine. My surgeon, 
Dr. Lurie, said to me, “There isn’t any patient 
of mine going back to work in nine days.” 

I said, “Why not? I feel fine.” 

I think it was the next week that I went 
back, and I felt great. I’ve had no more 
problems to this day. 

In 1981, Pete Sferrazza and Florence 
Lehners were elected to the city council. I think 
they were elected because the community 
felt I needed support and help in getting 
my programs adopted. Peter was known 
because he had run before. His positions on 
growth, along with those of Florence, were 
very compatible with mine. Peter replaced 
Stan Greene, I think, and Florence replaced 
Bill Wallace. 

Florence was really an absolute political 
unknown in the area, because she had never 
been involved in city government. It was all 
new to her, so it was difficult—perhaps more 
difficult for her than it might have been for 
some others. But she worked very hard at it. I 
did not find her difficult to work with. There 



56 


Barbara Bennett 


is a learning process that anyone who goes to 
city hall has to go through. 

Spoon didn’t run, and Jim Thornton came 
in in his district. Jim Thornton was the choice 
of Bill Wallace and Pine. He beat Merle Snider. 
They were the two top vote-getters in the 
primary, but Thornton beat Snider in the run¬ 
off. Snider had connections with a union, and 
I’m not sure how well he could have withstood 
pressures from the construction industries to 
support things if he had been elected. 

Jim Thornton was a former president of 
the Associated General Contractors and had 
been a paving contractor, although I think he 
had sold his business or was in the process of 
selling it about that time. But to me, when I 
hear AGC, Associated General Contractors, 
this is the group I had been trying to deal with 
all the time I had been at city hall—and very 
unsuccessfully, I might add. At any rate, I liked 
Jim Thornton as a person, because he came in 
and talked with me. He said, as so many others 
did, “We have more in common than you 
think.” But we didn’t, and that also was borne 
out in later days, because I simply could not 
see how someone from Jim’s background could 
believe in the same things I did where growth 
management and control were concerned in 
the city. We were worlds apart, and Jim also 
had a terrible temper. He would really get 
furious at the council table...that’s just where 
he came down. But he was an honest man. 

Snider was a union man—he was a 
musician. I’ve always been a strong supporter 
of unions because of this working background 
of mine. I knew how important the evolution 
of unions had been in benefitting working men 
and women—how the working conditions 
had improved, how wages had improved—so 
it was very difficult for me to be outspoken 
against the construction trades. But the 
construction trades were closely allied with 
the Associated General Contractors and 


the development interests because they saw 
that as their job. My attitude was, “Well, I 
understand this, but don’t you understand 
that if all this growth continues, you’re going 
to work yourself out of a job? Then what do 
you do—do you leave the community?” It 
would have been in their best interests, in my 
opinion, for the construction trade unions to 
support planned growth so that they would 
know that they would have a job five years 
down the road. But instead, they accepted 
this attitude: “We’ll take everything we can 
get as far as we can get it.” That meant they 
would wind up having to bring all of these 
construction workers in from out of town 
and burn up the jobs that the locals should be 
working in. But I was never able to convince 
them of that. At any rate, I did endorse Merle 
Snider over Jim Thornton in that election, and 
did not regret it. 

I think we all agreed that we had serious 
problems in the community. We’d talked 
about the water; we’d talked about air quality, 
we’d talked about the cost of living; we’d talked 
about transportation, streets, smog—all the 
things which are still besetting us. I was trying 
to develop some kind of a consensus, and after 
talking with Dick Scott, I kind of felt that we 
could at least work together on some of these 
things. His employment with Boomtown was 
outside of Reno in Washoe County. I just 
felt that I probably wouldn’t always have his 
support, but there might be some times when I 
could get some help from him. His opponent, 
Millick, was not running an active campaign 
and was a total unknown. Scott obviously had 
a lot of political support from his service on 
the Washoe County Commission, and I felt 
he was going to be elected. I felt that the only 
thing to do was to endorse him and see if the 
endorsement would help get him in my corner 
on a few things. 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


57 


I never knew where Dick Scott was going 
to come from. I felt that I really needed his 
support and help on that council, so when he 
first arrived at city hail, I made it a point to call 
out to Boomtown and set up an appointment 
to meet with him. I wanted to feel him out 
and talk to him about some of the things 
that Id like to do. I did it that way rather than 
asking him to come into my office so that I 
wouldn’t sound like a power-happy mayor. I 
intentionally went out there to see him, and 
he decided to keep me waiting, which put 
me in kind of a foul mood. We really didn’t 
reach any kind of consensus on where he was 
going to go, but I never knew from one time 
to another where he was going to end up. 

Dick was a disappointment to me. I 
think I got about what I expected from 
the other people I served with. But I really 
expected more of Dick. He had served as 
county commission chairman, and I felt his 
background would be helpful in ways. But 
Dick never showed any real interest in the 
city council, and I’m not sure why. However, 
after all, he was president of Boomtown at 
that time, which I’m sure was demanding a 
lot of his time. Maybe he was discouraged to 
“just” be a member of the city council, rather 
than being in a governing role or in a position 
of any high authority. I don’t know. He may 
have been caught between two factions, which 
is another possibility. He may have felt that 
maybe he would have liked to have helped me 
with some of the things that I needed help on, 
but he also didn’t want to alienate the other 
side over here. That could have been a part 
of his problem. 

But my main problem with Dick Scott 
was that he showed up at council meetings 
absolutely unprepared to deal with things. 
I think we all had a sense that Dick barely 
opened his city council packages, which, 
incidentally, very often ran six inches in depth. 


So maybe he didn’t have a chance to do it or 
maybe he felt he was familiar enough with the 
material. I don’t know. He was not a difficult 
guy to work with—he’s very personable. 

I felt that I was personally more effective 
with this council than with its predecessor, 
although I don’t make close personal 
relationships. I honestly never had a dose 
relationship with Florence, Pete, or any of 
them, because that’s not my way. I have friends 
that were personal friends from the time I 
went to school, and I make life-long friends. 
But I do not make friends easily. I never was 
comfortable just being a glad-hander, which is 
another political liability. Really, it is. I found 
it very easy to be nice around people, and 
to be comfortable with them, but I was not 
interested in forming those kinds of personal 
relationships. 

During the second part of my city council 
term, I know people got mad at me. Jim 
Thornton would really get mad at me, and 
Dick Scott and Janice Pine at times, too... 
all of them. But it never amounted to the 
kind of real vicious antagonism that existed 
with that first group on the city council. We 
accomplished a lot with the new group—we 
made the first steps. For instance, once the 
planning commission got going and our 
planning department was functioning, we got 
a profile that really had a lot of data. It took a 
long time to compile. 

Robert Hunter was the head of the 
planning department, and he had just a 
staff of two, if memory serves me right. The 
department had been created by ordinance. 
It was created just before the first council 
went out back in April of 1981. The fact that 
we finally got this profile out during my 
administration was all right. 

Robert Hunter was in a very unenviable 
position in compiling the profile, because he 



58 


Barbara Bennett 


was in the position of creating a document to 
try to please a council that he knew was split 
philosophically. His job, in my opinion, was 
to present the facts, and wed deal with the rest 
of it. I did feel that he could count votes, too, 
just like everybody else. I did not see the kind 
of hard-hitting document that I wanted to see, 
which is not to say that everybody else was 
wrong. Maybe that was all we should have had 
at that time. I really wanted this document to 
recommend less than a three or three-and-a- 
half percent rate of growth annually. In the 
end the profile got through, but I never got 
the limitations that I wanted, though I didn’t 
expect to get them all. 

We had been going to public hearings, 
too, and getting input from there. There are 
two kinds of neighborhood meetings. I had 
neighborhood meetings when I ran for office, 
and I continued to have them after I was elected 
But the kind of neighborhood meetings I’m 
talking about are community meetings. I 
wanted to have community meetings in a big 
facility, and some of the council agreed. We 
had all the community meetings in places 
that could hold 400 or 500 people, so that the 
people would have an opportunity to say how 
they wanted their city to grow. Of course, in 
addition to hearing from the general public, 
there was a well-orchestrated appearance by 
the development community at every single 
meeting. So they’ve got their right to appear, 
too. Those developers were smart. They 
would never send the same people to every 
meeting. For instance, you would see officers 
from the Associated General Contractors at 
city hall representing general development 
interests. You would see the developer, and the 
contractor, who had an interest in a specific 
project, would be there. They would bring in 
people from the construction industry, too. 
Another time there’d be an engineer or an 
architect. There would be a different person 


from the Homebuilders or the Associated 
Vendors.... They’re not fools. 

The developers knew how to orchestrate 
these kinds of things, and they were very 
powerful. Where their own interests were 
concerned, they were very well informed and 
able to hire very good minds to perpetuate 
their attitudes and opinions. But fortunately, 
we must’ve outnumbered them some of the 
times, like forty or fifty to one. So the public 
was very supportive, which gave me a shot 
in the arm, because I thought, “OK. What 
I’m hearing from the public is that they are 
essentially in agreement with me.” Not in 
everything, though, because I never expected 
everybody to agree with me on everything. 
But essentially they supported the direction 
that I saw. That’s what they were saying “Give 
us direction. Control the growth. Don’t spend 
resources we don’t have. Plan for what’s going 
in this community. Don’t go through water 
shortages.” I guess that’s why I’d been elected, 
because I felt the majority in the public and I 
were attuned to begin with. I hadn’t changed 
and they hadn’t changed, and that really 
rubbed a lot of the council members. They 
felt that I used it to my advantage...of course 
I used it, because that’s what I was there for. I 
was there to represent the city and the people 
in it, not special interests of any kind. 

We didn’t really advertise the meetings-I 
don’t recall that we gave them a title or 
anything official. They were held maybe once 
a month at the different schools, so they would 
be easy to attend by the local people. At each 
one of the meetings, a different member of 
the council was the chair. 

The first meeting that we held was in the 
northwest, and for a first meeting there was 
a very good turnout. The next one was at the 
university, which took in all of that area over 
there. That was a very large meeting. The next 
largest one was in southwest I can’t remember 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


59 


the name of the school, but it was absolutely 
packed. There was standing room only, and 
people were out the doors. It really surprised 
me, because that’s a well-to-do area, and it also 
houses so many of the business interests. It 
was obvious that there was a schism between 
the well-to-do people in the southwest as to 
how they wanted their community to grow. I 
always felt that they had the most to lose. They, 
apparently, felt the same way, especially when 
they were putting tens of thousands of dollars 
into building a home and situating in an area 
where they don’t want to be encroached upon 
by development. 

There was a smaller turnout at the Pine 
School in the southeast, and not too great a 
turnout over there in the northeast. I think 
that was our last meeting. I walked out of 
the meeting that was held at Pine Middle 
School because I had heard the same story 
over and over and over from the developers. 
I’d gotten so sick of it that I finally just got up 
and walked out. The developers said they were 
offended, but I’m sure they weren’t. They were 
probably glad to get rid of me. But they had 
an opportunity to make an issue of it and they 
did, so I bad to admit that it had been rude 
for me to walk out. And I did say that. I said, 
“My mind hasn’t changed a bit. I’ve heard it 
all before and I’m really tired of hearing it, but 
it was rude of me to walk out.” So I wound 
up apologizing, but it didn’t seem to hurt me 
politically at all. 

The southeast was not what it is now, 
because that’s all been put in new out there. 
It’s practically a whole city in itself for being 
a no-growth community.... Because it has 
expanded a lot, the people out there have a 
stake in what’s going on. I think as a result, 
they’ve become more active politically in the 
community, too. But I couldn’t say what the 
attitude of the people in the community is 
today, because we have too many new people. 


I have no political sense of where they come 
from and what brought them here. Plus, we’ve 
always had so many transient people. 

Bill Eadington at the university was 
quoted in the paper around 1986 as saying: 
“...local government may have to devise a 
method for pushing back the costs of growth 
so that those who generate it”—in this case the 
gaming industry-”pay for it.” Now once again 
we have a council that is trying to impose fees 
on new growth. They’re having the same battle 
that’s been going on for years and years by the 
development community, which is trying to 
head it off, to stop it. They don’t want to pay 
these things, but we know that somebody has 
to. In my opinion, it’s unfair to expect the 
people that have been here for years, and 
who have contributed to the economy of 
this community, to pick up the new costs of 
growth—which they have dearly indicated 
they don’t want. 

In 1981 and 1982 we wanted the housing 
community to build some low-to-moderate- 
cost housing, and they said they couldn’t 
make enough profit at it. My attitude then 
was that you can’t impose this kind of impact 
fees on the builders, because they’re going to 
pass it on to the person that buys the home. 
But is that any more fair than passing it on to 
somebody else who was already here? Because 
that’s what they’re suggesting the alternative 
should be. 

When I was mayor, I talked a great 
deal about economic diversification. I have 
never pretended to be the first one that did, 
because they had WIN [Western Industrial 
Nevada], and we did have a rather substantial 
warehousing industry. But even that was not 
generating a lot of the kinds of paying jobs 
that would permit people to cope with the 
accelerating cost of living in the city of Reno. 



60 


Barbara Bennett 


I think the city of Sparks has been more 
responsible in dealing with its problems 
than Reno has. They had some pretty good 
planning measures, and they were also 
diversifying—perhaps it was not necessarily 
because they were so wise, but because 
most of the warehousing industry lies out in 
that end of the community Sparks was in a 
position that if no more hotel-casinos were 
built, their economy was pretty safe. 

The city of Reno has been so heavily 
dependent upon the gaming and hotel 
industries that it was really very foolish. I 
think that Sparks did a lot of wise things long 
before we were able to convince anybody in 
Reno to do them. Reno could certainly expand 
its warehousing industry. But there were a lot 
of industries that people were not seeking to 
upgrade—bookbinding, for one thing, and 
also research in association with the university. 
Here we have a university town, and we didn’t 
really have any industry that could or was 
interested in taking advantage of it. 

In conjunction with the University of 
Nevada, WIN did a study about attracting 
new industry to Reno. They made some very 
solid recommendations, and even went to 
businesses to poll them on how they felt about 
moving to Reno and what the problems were. 
One of the most persistent answers that we 
got was the power of the gaming community. 
Many people didn’t feel that their businesses 
would be very important in a community 
like ours. Some very good recommendations 
and support came out of that study and 
subsequent meetings. It has helped because 
there are some groups that now work very 
seriously on diversifying our economy. WIN 
is one of them, and there’s also the Economic 
Development Authority of Western Nevada 
[EDAWN] EDAWN works very hard bringing 
in new kinds of development. Kevin Day, who 
was a bank officer, was the head of EDAWN. 


There was a trip to Switzerland in 
November, 1981, that was put together by a 
group of business people that I was working 
with. With the exception of $1,300, the 
business community paid for the whole trip. 
We considered the trip to be fairly successful. 
I don’t know how wise it was, except that we 
could attract some foreign investment money 
into the area. There was a lot of that taking 
place at that time. It was their impression 
that it might help to get us on the road to 
diversification. Bob Pearce was involved with 
WIN, but I don’t know what he was doing at 
that time. Vein Meiser was also interested 
in what was going on at that time. He is in 
warehousing. He had a lot of warehouses. 
Hans Wolfe, a vice president of First Interstate 
Bank, also went on the trip. It seemed when 
we needed an interpreter, Hans wasn’t always 
there, so the language barriers were a bit of 
a problem. 

There was nothing earthshaking that 
happened over there. We talked with people 
from Austria and Germany, of course, and 
a lot of French and Swiss people. I guess 
Kevin Day traveled to Europe frequently, 
and most of those’ people did speak English, 
anyway. They expressed a lot of interest and 
asked questions about Nevada. They were 
very interested in the fact that we have no 
corporate tax, no state income tax, and that 
we are a freeport state. 

I had high hopes that economic 
diversification would accelerate, and it did. 
Hotel-casino development has slowed now— 
there’s no question about it. But it has slowed 
more out of their own need to slow it down 
than it has in an effort to accommodate the 
community’s wishes. We have just seen the 
Peppermill get a large expansion. It’s possible 
that some of these things that have been 
pending for years have been approved now. 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


61 


There has also been another casino approved 
out near the airport.... Heaven help us if a plan 
ever goes down in that area. I happen to think 
it’s too dose to the airport for safety, and I 
also think it shouldn’t be that near Wooster 
High School. Plus, the traffic problems in that 
end of town do not lend themselves well to 
another hotel-casino out there. 

I don’t have negative thoughts about the 
gaming industry. It plays too important a role 
in the economy of this state to put it down. 
Given our location and how we grew, I don’t 
think that we would ever be in a position to 
even go after other kinds of industry if we 
didn’t at least have the solid base here. So I 
don’t have any problems with the gaming 
industry per se. But I do not believe it should 
be allowed to expand at will. The demanding 
taxes on the casino industry have never been 
overwhelming. Even today I think it’s five and 
three-quarters percent at the state level. 

I have never wanted to see Reno in the 
position of Las Vegas, where there is gaming 
in every single direction, scattered all over. 
That’s always been a major concern of mine. 
Early on in my administration I said—and 
have said repeatedly—that to be healthy, every 
city has to have a healthy downtown core. Our 
downtown core happens to be hotel-casinos. 
That being the case, then we want it to be 
presentable and successful, because if you 
destroy downtown Reno, I don’t know where 
you’re going to go from there. 

One of the alternatives is to scatter gaming 
all over the city, and it’s showing unfortunate 
signs of moving south. We used to have a 
red line policy, but it has been gone for some 
time. My attitude is that that red line should 
not just encompass just half a dozen square 
city blocks. As part of the studies that have 
been done, the downtown core area is looked 
at now as going from city hall along the river 
clear to Keystone and includes the few blocks 


the other side of the river down to the freeway. 
So there is a vast area there for putting in 
gaming hotel-casinos. 

The reason for the hotel-casinos moving 
out is that land is cheaper out there, period, 
If they want to buy land downtown, it’s 
expensive. But if you want to go into the 
gaming business you ought to be willing 
to buy expensive land. Then we have the 
Mapes, an historic building, which is empty. I 
happen to believe that the Mapes is a beautiful 
building. I think it’s ideally suited for being 
renovated. If you want a hotel-casino, why go 
out and build one clear out on South Virginia 
Street when we’ve got that one right there 
where people can walk to it in the downtown 
area? Then there is also the Riverside, which is 
being purchased by the county so that county 
offices can be put in it. 

Reno was facing some difficulties during 
this period of time in 1981. Sixty-five 
city employee positions had been cut due 
to Proposition 6. [Proposition 6 put a 
constitutional cap on property taxes, reducing 
revenues returned to municipalities between 
1978 and 1980. [Ed.] As far as that was 
concerned, I was considered to be someone 
that was very much in tune with the public, 
but Proposition 6 was an area in which I 
disagreed with the majority of the public. The 
public today still does not want tax increases. 
They felt at that time that taxes were too high. 
They probably were, because they’d gone 
way up, but Proposition 6, in my opinion, 
would have placed a really disproportionate 
share of the tax burden on the homeowner. 
Back then, the reassessment of all of the 
downtown gaming property had not been 
done since 1972.1 guess we had lost millions 
of dollars because of the failure to reassess 
down there. If that had gone through, their 
tax rates downtown would’ve been frozen 



62 


Barbara Bennett 


in position, which meant that that revenue 
would be gone forever, so Proposition 6 was 
really troublesome. I thought that there had 
to be better ways of controlling government 
expenses, and that gets back to the growth 
problems of the time. 

As I’ve said before, it takes a minimum 
of 18 months for growth to catch up with 
itself. When there is rapid growth, streets 
have to be caught up, and at that time it cost 
about a million dollars a mile to put in a road. 
Obviously, it also costs a lot of money to buy 
land to build schools. In one instance when 
the Gold Dust downtown came in, I was 
still trying to push for revenue analysis with 
new projects that were being developed so 
that we could look at them on a cumulative 
basis. I wanted to look at what was already 
approved, and add the costs and the water and 
everything together so that we would have an 
ongoing cumulative cost—we never got one, 
incidentally. They’ve gone back to that now 
and are beginning to get some cumulative 
figures. 

When you stop and look at the overall 
picture, it’s really kind of frightening. 
Proposition 6 was not the panacea that 
people believed. Ultimately, we reached the 
point where we just had to go to the voters 
for support for the fire department, the police 
department, and the city’s budget. The city 
couldn’t pay for those kinds of life-saving 
services in the community that are absolutely 
essential. 

It has always been my contention that if 
the costs of new growth had been attached at 
the time that these projects were approved, it 
would’ve discouraged some of them. Those 
that it did not discourage would have had 
to agree to pick up those costs. Now, here 
we are again, talking about imposing these 
costs upon developers, and developers are 
fighting it like crazy—nobody still knows 


how to deal with the needs that come up in 
the community. I mean, do we go for more 
school bonds, which we’ve already had? 
Do we use bonds to go out and bring water 
into the community to support more sewer 
expansion? No. 

I thought that those new costs had to 
come from someplace else, thereby relieving 
taxpayers of an increasing burden. That 
would’ve been the way to go, because now 
the legislature has placed caps on local 
government because they decided in their 
wisdom that city governments had a lot 
of waste...I don’t know how closely they 
examined their own efficiencies at the state 
level. But I never agreed with that. 

I believe the legislature was too far 
removed from the problem to understand 
what any city’s problems were. If they were 
trying to place limits on people’s ability to 
raise income in a community, I think they 
should have imposed the same kind of limits 
on themselves. Spending for social services 
was to drop from about $913,000 to $644,000, 
and these cuts were going to come in things 
like Elderport and drug and child abuse 
programs. But Citifare was to keep quite a bit 
of money. Citifare was really just getting on 
its feet and depending heavily upon federal 
financing. 

This was at the time in the Reagan 
administration when they were looking at a 
tremendous number of cuts, particularly in the 
area of social services, and the administration 
was also making state and local governments 
more responsible for their own financial 
support rather than getting these monies out 
of the federal government. The interesting 
thing about it was that nobody was paying a 
lot less money to the federal government— 
the monies were just being apportioned in a 
different way. The people on local levels have 
to understand that in the end they’re not better 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


63 


off at all, and really have a lot less to say about 
how their monies are being spent I think that 
there was a mood at that time that still prevails 
to some extent today, government should 
not be in the business of providing social 
services. I think that we have seen enough of 
the negative impacts of the government failing 
to deal with social problems to know that it 
is in the city’s best interest to look after the 
concerns of a community. 

In May of 1981, Reno withdrew from the 
Regional Planning Commission. In April, the 
city approved its own planning commission. 
Sparks also withdrew from the planning 
commission. They formed their own planning 
department so they could be responsible for 
their own future. Reno had decided at that 
point in time that we, too, wanted the same 
options. It was inappropriate for the Washoe 
County Commission that had the final say 
over the Regional Planning Commission to 
make determinations for the city of Reno. 
It was also true that the Washoe County 
Commission at that time had a very pro¬ 
growth attitude, which certainly seemed to 
be changing the city of Reno. 

Many people who were appointed to boards 
and commissions had been recommended by 
the mayor with the city council’s approval. But 
that isn’t true of all boards and commissions. 
The planning commission was one of the 
exceptions, because that was written into 
the ordinance that created the commission. 
So each council member was to appoint one 
person with full council approval. At that time 
I made a list of who they were, and it sort of 
reminded me why things remained the status 
quo as much for the next couple of years. 

Ted Osgood, who was an engineer, was 
appointed to the planning commission by 
Dick Scott. Engineering is closely associated 
with development interests, and he was a 


member of the Homebuilders Association. 
I didn’t know much about him, and I don’t 
think a lot of us did. 

Vi Sprenger, who was a licensed 
contractor and a licensed architect, had done 
a considerable amount of developing in the 
area, and he was appointed to the commission 
by Thornton. This was when the new council 
came in in 1981. 

Janice Pine appointed a vice-president 
of the Pioneer Citizen’s Bank Harry 
Zuehlsdorff. And Florence Lehners, with my 
encouragement, appointed Steve Francis, 
who passed away. It was a terrible shame. He 
was a hardworking member of that planning 
commission. I appointed Kathryn Wishart, 
and Pete Sferrazza appointed Hill Moon, a 
member of the black community in Reno. 

Bill Moon’s record on the planning 
commission was one of consistent approval 
of growth in the area. I had good working 
relations and close ties to the black community, 
and I think I understood where he was 
coming from, though I certainly wasn’t happy 
about it. Bill’s idea was that blacks needed 
employment, and he felt the good paying 
jobs were to be found in the construction 
industries. Well, there’s some truth in that, but 
in my discussions I was never able to convince 
him that those things are so temporary —if 
they’re building hotel-casinos and they’re 
building fast-food joints, when this building 
is no longer going on, then where do they go 
to work? 

I never felt then and don’t feel now that 
they were doing the black community any 
great service supporting the kinds of projects 
that Bill voted for. David Howard, who had 
been an assistant secretary of state, had 
indicated to me that he was very supportive 
of what I was trying to do with growth. I 
found out later that in my opinion, at least, 
he certainly spoke with a forked tongue. He 



64 


Barbara Bennett 


became more and more pro-growth, and just 
obstinately so. Joe McClelland was the one 
that appointed Mr. Howard, and with his 
voting record, I should have expected that. 
Joe would not have recommended someone 
who thought as I did. 

That was the composition of the initial 
planning commission, and the result of the 
recommendations that came out of it closely 
paralleled the make-up of that commission, 
and the people who appointed them, [laughs] 
Steve Francis and Kathryn Wishart were the 
loners on there, just kind of sitting back and 
not able to accomplish what they hoped. Steve 
Francis was an early chairman. He was a very 
forceful guy, and I think that he was able to 
make some inroads into the thinking on that 
commission. But generally speaking it was 
just business as usual. 

During my administration there was a 
rumor—which I’ve never been able to prove— 
that some people in town had put up $10,000 
to remove me from office. They never stopped 
their efforts to discredit me. They gave up 
trying to do it personally because they knew 
they couldn’t. But they just harped at my 
policies on growth constantly. I think that a 
lot of those people decided the best way to 
get me out of there was to get me down to the 
governor’s office. 

We were approaching the end of 1982, 
and the elections were over and Dick Bryan 
had been elected governor by that time. I 
was a Democrat and I had supported him 
personally—not publicly. He was my personal 
choice. Because the mayoral office was non¬ 
partisan, I didn’t endorse any partisan offices, 
but certainly personally he had my support 
and he knew it. 

I had a call from one of his top aides one 
day. He said he’d heard that I was interested 
in serving in the Bryan administration. As a 


matter of fact, I had given it some thought. 
John had had to take a medical disability, 
and my $10,000 salary was not going very far. 
We were both in our sixties by then—John in 
his late sixties—and our future was not very 
secure economically. I really felt I had to do 
something. I knew I wasn’t going to run for 
reelection. I couldn’t afford to, though I had 
not said it publicly. I had said that I might not 
run, but I did not come out and make a flat 
declaration. 

At any rate, apparently the word that 
we were having financial problems did 
get around. I got this call, and I said that I 
probably would be interested in serving in 
Dick’s administration. As a matter of fact, I 
was glad to receive the call, because it wasn’t 
something I would have asked for. They said 
they’d get back to me, and the word leaked out 
somehow that I was being considered for a job 
with Dick’s administration. Ultimately I did 
accept a job down there in the Youth Services 
Division at better than three times the salary 
that I was making in city hall, which at the 
time was extremely valuable to us. 

I really felt terrible about leaving office 
early, but my first responsibility has always 
been to my family. John had never been able 
to work from the day he had his heart surgery 
in 1979. It was hard for us at $10,000 a year. 
We had to do something. We’d been prudent 
and had managed to put some savings away, 
but it wasn’t sufficient. We were just surviving. 

It was a very painful decision, but it was 
one I had to make. I told the governor that I 
was interested, and that was my reason for 
going. But there was a rumor about it, even 
before a job was offered to me. I said, “They 
contacted me, I didn’t contact them.” Anyway, 
they really wanted me out of town, and the 
development interests wanted to make sure 
I didn’t run for office again. There were 
probably some other business interests, too, 



Service as Reno’s Mayor, 1979-1981 


65 


some of which disliked me personally, some 
of which didn’t want me at city hall. There 
were plenty of those around. 

I had occasion to talk to Dick Scott, who 
was serving on the council at that time. I 
told him that I had received an offer from 
the Bryan campaign, and he said that he 
knew. He strongly implied that he had been 
the mover and shaker on getting that done, 
which kind of bothered me because then I 
thought, “What is going on? What do we 
have—casino interests that are interested 
in getting me out of here, or is Dick really 
concerned about my finances? Does he want 
to help?” Dick Scott worked for Bob Cashell 
who was lieutenant governor at that time. 
Cashell and Bryan were not exactly “bosom 
buddies.” I did feel that it was necessary to 
talk to the governor about it. I wanted his 
opinion on whether Dick Scott had, in fact, 
been instrumental in doing me this great big 
favor. Governor Bryan assured me that he had 
not. Dick Scott was a funny guy. He’s a very 
likable guy, but in my opinion, Dick Scott 
sees himself as a kingmaker-someone behind 
the scenes. It wasn’t just an impression I had 
from working with him at city hall.... When 
we went down to the governor’s inauguration, 
they had just so many chairs sitting up on the 
stage for people who were going to speak and 
the newly elected state officials. Of course, 
Bob Cashell was there. While a chair had not 
been provided for him, Dick Scott still stood 
on the stage. 




6 


With the Nevada Youth Services, 
Common Cause, and the 
Ethics Commission 


I began my new job as deputy 
administrator for the Youth Services Division 
in Carson City on January 3,1982, which was 
about a week or two after I left the mayors 
job. I was hired as the deputy director. There 
were a number of comments made that I had 
always been so involved with seniors and 
cared about them. I was serving on several 
boards dealing with seniors’ issues and had 
a governors appointment down there. 

When my term ran out and the county 
was taking over that board, I applied to be 
reappointed, but the county turned me down. 
All I can do is speculate. I guess publicly 
elected officials are not too happy about 
people who are no longer in public office 
taking shots at them, [laughs] Especially those 
with a big mouth like I have. 

There were things that I felt I could really 
contribute to what the seniors needed and 
the way things should be done. But I figured, 
“Well, there’s no sense in fighting another 
battle at this point in time.” So I let it go. 


But there had been comments made about 
why, when I had been so involved with the 
seniors, was I appointed to the Youth Services 
Division? They saw that as being strange, but 
perhaps it was because of my childhood— 
which I had never discussed publicly before 
this—that I had an interest in youth as well as 
seniors. I found the work with the youth to be 
absolutely fascinating—I loved it. 

The man who was in charge of the Youth 
Services Division had not been reappointed 
and was leaving. But he was still there when I 
arrived. I admitted to him that I didn’t know 
anything about the Youth Services Division, 
and asked him what to do. He told me about 
looking things up in files and about records 
to get into, and he was willing to talk about 
these things. He had been a professional in 
this line, so he was a good man. 

At any rate, I can never do anything 
halfway. I’m that way whether it comes to 
cutting a lawn or cooking a meal or being 
mayor...when I get into something, I go whole 



68 


Barbara Bennett 


hog. I did in this job, too. One of my duties was 
to gather, collate, and make recommendations 
based on information. 

For the most part, the Youth Services 
Division dealt with probation and parole; it 
dealt with kids who had been in trouble; it 
dealt with kids who were not in trouble but 
were being placed in foster homes. It also dealt 
with a lot of abused children. Child care came 
under it as well, which was an interest of mine 
and had been when I was at city ball. But the 
kids that I had the most emotional feel for, I 
guess, were the kids that were being placed 
in foster homes, many whom were going 
through home after home after home. They 
didn’t find any reason or explanation for this 
with the kids that were being placed in our 
institutions: the boys up at Elko and the girls 
down in Caliente. 

After a while of dealing with the statistics 
and putting these things together, a lot of 
things just hit me between the eyes. For 
instance, the boys that were being sent up to 
the Youth Services institution at Elko usually 
had more than one offense that would have 
been a felony had they been an adult. So they 
were being committed for serious offenses 
up there. (That place, incidentally, was run 
by a very good man.) When I looked at the 
statistics for the girls facility, I saw that the 
girls were rarely being committed because of 
serious offenses. They were being committed 
because of prostitution, alcoholism, running 
away, for being hard to handle—things that if 
you were an adult would not even be a crime. 
I really felt that there was a disparity and it 
needed to be looked into. 

Chuck McGee, who’s now a district judge, 
was the juvenile master at that time. He has 
always had such an interest in kids, and does 
to this day. The conclusion that I reached 
when I was down at Caliente was that we 
didn’t need to be locking up girls who were 


coming more often than not from abusive 
backgrounds, just because of this. They were 
more likely to turn toward criminal instincts 
because of being incarcerated like this. I was 
concerned, because at that time better than 
50 percent of the girls were in the facility for 
alcohol and drug problems, but they didn’t 
have a drug counselor and or an alcoholic 
counselor on the post. 

I talked to Chuck McGee, Bob Fahrendorf, 
and one of the women from the district 
attorney’s office. Bob Fahrendorf was the 
public defender at that time. We all worked 
on these kinds of things and talked about 
them. I felt that we needed to make a trip 
down to Caliente to see for ourselves, rather 
than just looking at numbers and abstracts. 
We made an unannounced trip, which the 
administration down there did not like. When 
we got there we did not allow ourselves to 
be herded in specific directions that they 
wanted us to go—we wanted to see what 
was happening. The place was clean, so I left 
really reassured on that count. But although 
the staff did try hard, I felt that they were 
professionally incompetent to deal with the 
problems of those kids. I think there was a 
consensus on that. 

Another problem existed, though, which 
I discussed with Carlos Romo, who was then 
the director of Youth Services. It was my 
opinion that one of the main problems that 
we had was that there was no place to put 
these kids who were runaways, prostitutes, 
and truants. When one case went to court in 
which a girl was being committed to Caliente, 
I testified at the hearing and said that I didn’t 
think that it was wise to do that. But the judge’s 
question was a very valid one. It was, “Well, 
where do we put her?” What was needed was 
sort of halfway houses for these kinds of kids. 

Chuck McGee now has this idea for 
something which is like a halfway house. 



With the Nevada Youth Services, Common Cause, and the Ethics Commission 


69 


I’m not sure what he calls it, but it’s for these 
kinds of kids so they can really be helped. He 
is someone that I’ve got to get in touch with 
soon to see if that’s an area in which I can 
offer some help. I don’t know whether I can, 
but I would like to be involved. The halfway 
house that Chuck has in mind is going to be 
right here in Washoe County. I think with the 
Chuck McGees of the world out there looking 
after kids, things have got to get better. I really 
am so impressed with him. 

I sometimes had contact with foster 
parents. Occasionally a parent would come 
into the office if their kid was in trouble. I 
was also in touch with the kids when I went 
down to Caliente, but not often. What you 
see is a name on a piece of paper with the 
offense and the person’s track record. To a 
certain extent I was involved in helping place 
children in foster homes. Good foster parents 
are very hard to find. I think maybe now the 
state provides the foster parents with sufficient 
monies to really take care of that youngster as 
if he were their own. They receive money for 
medical use, clothing allowances, food—for 
all of these kinds of things that are needed. 

But sometimes people who volunteer to 
be foster parents really don’t have that much 
interest in the children. They want the money. 
They feel they can make money off of these 
youngsters. That’s why I say that good foster 
parents are hard to find. At the same time, 
you don’t want to lose them when you find 
them. There are also countless cases of foster 
homes where children have been abused or 
molested. It’s pretty hard to know these things. 
You can do a thorough investigation, but 
maybe that family never neglected, abused, or 
molested that child in the past. All of a sudden 
they’re presented with an opportunity, and 
unfortunately, too often take advantage of it. 

Clark County is way ahead of us in these 
kinds of things. They have better facilities and 


more of this kind of halfway house thing, so 
they have alternatives in dealing with kids. 
They’re way ahead of us in dealing with child 
abuse, too. They’ve had a center down there 
for years. So there are a lot of things that still 
need to be done here to protect kids, to give 
them a fighting chance of getting out of this 
lifestyle in which they, more often then not, 
have been forced by being poor. 

In order for a halfway house to work, 
there would have to be a certain amount of 
trust between the adults and youth. In other 
words, if the youth wouldn’t stay and accept 
the help that was offered, the alternative might 
be confinement. I assume that something of 
this nature has to be understood between 
the staff and kids in order for them to work. 
And there would have to be absolutely a very 
competent, well-trained staff. The kids also 
need to be accessible to family so that they 
can have a tie to parents who are interested 
enough to maintain it and want to help. 

We have some good probation officers 
out in some of the small counties around 
here who work closely with these things. 
Some of them do good things locally, too, 
but it does cost some money to get things 
done. Unless the state’s willing to put up the 
bucks for it, a lot of these things that could be 
done will not get done, and in my opinion, 
the state is not willing to put up enough 
money. That may be too broad a statement, 
because in my opinion, the problems that I’ve 
been talking about must first be brought to 
the attention of the governor. I don’t know 
whether they were. 

A significant savings could be realized 
by not incarcerating these kids. It’s very 
expensive to lock them up, and alternative 
facilities would be far less costly and more 
effective. If the governor and legislature were 
informed of this fact, I think that they would 
go for it. It’s in their own best interest to do so. 



70 


Barbara Bennett 


The National Judicial College at the 
university really helped me because I took 
several courses. There were also two- and 
three-day seminars that we attended. We 
learned how other states are dealing with 
some of these problems, particularly in the 
areas of foster parenting and dealing with 
parents’ loss of control over their child and the 
court having to take over and be responsible 
for the kids. The National Judicial College 
has had a number of helpful seminars, and I 
presume it still does. 

I left the Youth Services Division in 
January of 1984. There were a number of 
reasons why-John’s health wasn’t good. I really 
felt guilty about leaving home at 6:30 in the 
morning and not getting back until 6:00 or 
6:30 in the evening I didn’t like leaving him 
alone if something happened. 

Another thing is I had a lot of trouble with 
my back. Matter of fact, I had back surgery 
many years ago. It doesn’t take much to kick 
it out. The worst thing in the world is to be 
seated in a position for any period of time 
where you’re limited in movement. That hour 
trip to work in the morning and another hour 
in the evening was causing me some health 
problems. 

Another thing was I really disliked the 
red tape. I went through the director, who 
in turn went through the head of Human 
Services. Then if they decide that there is 
something the governor ought to know, 
it goes to him. It’s frustrating. It’s not like 
being mayor, where I could go storming into 
the governor’s office or whatever! [laughs] I 
really liked the job. If it had been in Reno, 
I’d probably still be there—although with 
John’s continuing problems, it might not 
have been possible—but there were just 
too many reasons for leaving. I did regret 
leaving, because I really enjoyed the job. 


One group concerned with the issue of 
high spending is Common Cause. Common 
Cause was founded in about 1970 by John 
Gardner as a national organization and sort 
of a people’s lobby kind of thing. A lot of their 
concerns parallel mine. I had been a member 
back in the seventies, but when things got a 
little tough financially...you didn’t pay dues to 
all of these organizations that you did when 
things were sailing along. I dropped Common 
Cause for a while, and then got back to it 
because they were still doing the kinds of 
things that I believed in. They believe in ethics 
in government and they take on everybody- 
they don’t care whether it’s a Republican or a 
Democrat or who it is. They still do to this day. 
They have pushed hard for limiting PACs, and 
they expose anyone who they feel is abusing 
an elective office. I have great respect for them. 

It was my privilege to serve with Archibald 
Cox. He’s chairman of the board of Common 
Cause, and has been for a long time. I served 
on the national governing board, and he 
works with all of those people. I don’t believe 
there is anyone in any party who does not 
respect Archie Cox. I think he has that kind 
of an image with the public. 

I was chosen for the national governing 
board by national elections. The Common 
Cause members all over the country are sent 
a ballot with an explanation or little story on 
everyone that’s running. I had been nominated 
by the local Nevada Common Cause in late 
1983,1 think. I was elected in 1985. That was 
absolutely one of the greatest experiences of 
my life, serving on that board. The people 
that were elected were so intelligent, so 
hardworking, so involved, so caring. It’s not 
like going to almost any meeting where you 
get bored. The meetings always took off from 
the moment we’d get there with discussions 
and votes, recommendations and then 



With the Nevada Youth Services, Common Cause, and the Ethics Commission 


71 


counterarguments...it goes on and on. They 
bring in representatives from the state levels to 
tell what’s going on. So many state Common 
Cause groups have been responsible for 
meaningful ethics legislation and campaign 
finance laws that are good. They have played 
such an important role. 

There are 60 people who serve on the 
governing board, and we meet quarterly. 
The terms are three years. You meet the most 
fascinating people—just wonderful people... 
so bright. Sometimes you just sit there in awe 
and listen to them. The governing board is 
very representative of all parts of the country, 
and all races. But in Nevada—and across the 
nation, to some extent-Common Cause has 
been unable to attract a lot of minorities into 
the membership. I don’t how why, because 
certainly the kinds of things that they’re 
involved in are those things that benefit 
minorities or young people. But they just 
haven’t been able to really bring them in. 

Joe Robertson, who is also from Common 
Cause, and I tried going up to the university to 
talk to some of the university students. They 
seemed to agree with us, but they didn’t feel 
they had the time or the money or something 
to get involved. They’d rather let someone 
else do it. At that rate, Common Cause is not 
attracting enough young people, and I think 
that is a major concern. 

During our board meetings, we obviously 
had a lot of discussion about PACS, which are 
special interest groups that donate money to 
candidates. Anybody that believes that money 
doesn’t buy anything when you pour a lot into 
a campaign is naive. It’s bull. I think someone 
who says that doesn’t really believe it, but it 
sounds good to say it. Anybody who serves in 
office who says, “I took $ 1,000, but that doesn’t 
mean it’s going to buy me anything,”-is full of 
BULL. I’ve never known it to do otherwise. 


I’ve never known of instances where either 
incumbents or candidates took monies from 
special groups and turned around and voted 
against their interests. 

Along with discussing PACs, Common 
Cause talked about ethics in government. 
Civil rights has also been a big thing because 
it was the feeling of the majority of the 
governing board that civil rights were taking 
a beating in the Reagan administration, and 
that we really had to watch it cautiously. 

Archibald Cox felt that it was important 
not to spread ourselves too thinly, and 
Common Cause has always remembered that. 
But there have been times when issues were so 
important to people, like Bark’s nomination 
for the Supreme Court. A vote was taken as 
to whether we should get involved. It was a 
close vote because we had not been involved 
in that kind of thing before. But because it was 
one of the issues that would affect minorities, 
Common Cause people felt strongly about it. 
Bork had been questioned on certain things 
and apparently answered unsatisfactorily, 
or his track record was such that it scared 
Common Cause members. But it was a close 
vote, because of this idea of sticking only to 
a few things that we could deal with and be 
effective in. 

I was state chair of Common Cause for 
two years, 1985 and 1986. We didn’t have a 
president—only a chair. This was a year before 
and also a year during my national term. Each 
year, national Common Cause sends out a 
questionnaire dealing with the issues that 
had been before the board and were going to 
continue to be discussed during the next year. 
Reports and polls based on the questionnaire 
are given so that the board remains in 
constant touch with its membership, and we 
did that sometimes on a local level. During 
the two years I was on the state board, the 



72 


Barbara Bennett 


people of Nevada felt our main role should 
be dealing with ethics in government and 
doing something about campaign financing. 
So that’s where our efforts were concentrated. 

There are about 648 state members today 
and the basis of the membership is in Reno. 
The strength of Common Cause has been 
in Reno because of some very good people, 
starting with Merle Benet who was the first 
chairman. Some other people who are active 
included Gerald Prindiville, who’s over in 
Carson City; Orland Outland; Marion Siever; 
Joe Robertson; Irving Sandorfi... They have 
been so active and so loyal to Common Cause 
for so many years, they make us feel guilty! 
They are the backbone of Common Cause. 

During my term, we became very much 
aware that we were too much of a Reno 
organization, and we wanted to spread out, 
but people who are retired who belong 
to Common Cause don’t always have the 
finances to travel statewide. (Common Cause 
was not a wealthy organization, although 
we’d been building a nice fund and reached 
the point where we really could afford to do 
a number of things.) The governing board 
was elected here, although the ballots were 
sent out statewide. We decided to really have 
a recruiting effort and stretch ourselves into 
Las Vegas. In order to do that, we felt the best 
way to go about it was to hire an executive 
director, which many other successful states 
have done. So that’s the direction we went. 

Our first executive director didn’t pan 
out the way we had hoped that he would; 
Leola Armstrong was the unanimous choice 
to succeed him. She is the executive director 
of Common Cause in Nevada today. I have a 
tremendous amount of respect for her—she 
really gets things done. She agreed to serve 
on the board in the beginning and was a 
great contributor to it. Everyone is so pleased 
with the evolvement and the involvement 


of Common Cause now in these issues 
statewide. We’re going to be hearing a lot more 
from Common Cause in the future, too. 

I’m not active in Common Cause now. 
I’m certainly philosophically supportive of 
them with whatever contributions we can 
make, because I believe in them. I think that 
they are now in a position to have a very 
strong voice in the legislature when it comes 
to the kinds of things they’re interested in: 
ethics legislation, and campaign financing and 
restructuring. There are some elected officials 
in Las Vegas who have expressed an interest 
in that, and certainly Sue Wagner comes to 
mind once again. In the past she introduced 
legislation on this issue—or tried to. But it 
went nowhere. It’s very difficult to get people 
who are elected and sitting in an office to 
agree to toughen standards for themselves. I 
don’t know...maybe the only way to ever do 
it is going to be through initiative petitions. 

National Common Cause sends out a 
tremendous amount of information, such 
as the information I requested on ethics 
legislation from cities all over the country. 
They have a research staff that is there that 
can provide local groups with just about any 
information, and if they don’t have it, they’ll 
get it for you. Common Cause is an action 
group. 

Lobbying is a big thing in Washington 
with National Common Cause, and it is a 
big thing in all local state governments. They 
accomplish so many things. But these gaps are 
always out there when it comes to putting the 
final nail on that coffin that will really offer 
legislation that the public is entitled to have. 
“People’s lobby” is a term that is sometimes 
used, but not always in a complimentary 
fashion. I don’t know what’s wrong with it, 
but there are those who seem to think there’s 
something wrong with the people lobbying. 
Generally speaking, I think that Common 



With the Nevada Youth Services, Common Cause, and the Ethics Commission 


73 


Cause is well respected on the national level. 
I think that anyone who wants to be fair 
recognizes that Common Cause takes on 
Republicans and Democrats alike—they don’t 
care who it is. The membership is made up 
of both parties and independents, and they 
deserve respect. But I don’t think the public 
knows enough about them. 

I’m not active in Common Cause 
anymore, but I have started my second 
term as a member of the State of Nevada 
Commission on Ethics. We meet on an on- 
call basis. Whenever someone has an ethical 
question for the commission, they send a 
request to the chair, who is Carl F. Dodge. He 
is a hard-working chair, it’s an active group, 
but we are very limited by law as to what we 
can deal with. 

Most of us on the commission feel that 
there are things that we would like to be more 
involved in, but we are restricted because 
of the Ethics Law. It dictates what we’re 
permitted to do and what we’re not permitted 
to do. For instance, we have absolutely no 
authority where campaign contributions are 
concerned. The law says that you can issue an 
opinion, and the requesting party does not 
have to make that opinion public, but can if he 
or she so chooses. In my opinion, the problem 
with that kind of thinking is that obviously 
they’re not going to make it public unless it’s 
favorable for them to do so.... But most of the 
kinds of things that we’re dealing with fall 
under these kinds of limitations—they are not 
covered under the law, and therefore we have 
no authority. The legislature was very specific 
in passing that law to limit the responsibility 
of the Ethics Commission. 

The Commission was there in the past, 
but it was sleepwalking for so many years. 
It came back in the early 1980s, when Bryan 
was elected in 1982. But obviously it had to 


be funded, and the legislature is the only one 
that can fund it, so there were people in the 
legislature who put up the necessary money 
to get it going again. 

There are five people on the Commission. 
I was appointed initially by Sue Wagner, and 
I would guess that that would have been 
with the Governor’s approval. Sue served on 
a committee to kind of reactivate this group 
and get it going again, I guess. The law spells 
out representation on the Commission—like, 
a former member of a city, government or 
county commission; so many from Las Vegas; 
and you can’t have them from the same party. 
So there are some restrictions or limitations 
on who can serve on this thing. For instance, a 
Democratic governor couldn’t have appointed 
an entirely Democratic board and vice versa. 




7 


Reflections on Nevada Politics 


One of the things that I have always liked 
about Nevada is that it is a small enough state 
so that you could know your governors. I have 
known all the governors from Grant Sawyer 
on through Dick Bryan on a first-name basis. 
My sister just can’t get over that, being from 
San Francisco. She says, “My gosh, you know 
the governor?’ 

“Well,” I say, “everybody knows the 
governor, you know!” [laughs] That’s one of 
the really nice things about Nevada: you can 
have easy access to almost any elected official. 
Obviously some officials on a local level are 
better about offering that access and some are 
a lot better about paying attention when you 
do. But you know your city council people; 
you know your county commissioners; you 
know your legislators. It’s wonderful. If you’ve 
got something that you want to say to them, 
you know how to reach them, and you can talk 
to them in person. You can go down to the 
legislature; you can get them on the telephone; 
you can write them a letter, and they’ll 
respond. There are not many communities 
or states that really enjoy that. 


I don’t have any problem with Nevada 
politics. We’re a very split state. It’s interesting 
because down at the legislature last session 
one house was Democratic and the other 
Republican. We had a Republican governor, 
Bob List, prior to Dick arriving there. So there 
doesn’t seem to be any great effort to lock into 
a party situation. I really believe that more 
so than in most places, Nevada elects on the 
basis of the individual I think they cross party 
lines a lot to put the person in there that they 
want. I have a great deal of respect for a lot of 
people politically in this state. I think we’ve 
had some good elected representatives in 
Washington, and Nevada has had some really 
good governors since we’ve lived here. 

I think that Mike O’Callaghan was a 
really fine governor. I think Grant Sawyer 
was a good governor...they all had different 
positive aspects to them. I think Dick Bryan 
is a good governor. I didn’t know List as well, 
but I never had any problems with him. We 
always worked well together. I only met the 
lieutenant governor, Bob Miller, briefly. I don’t 
know a lot about Bob, only what I’ve read in 



76 


Barbara Bennett 


the papers, and our meetings were too brief to 
really form any opinions of him. Therefore, I 
don’t know what kind of a governor he’ll make 
if he steps in for Richard Bryan. 

But there are some other people I can 
think of that I like. For instance, there’s Brian 
McKay, who is the attorney general of the state 
of Nevada. I think he’s a very decent man. I 
don’t know whether he can, but I know he 
would like to do something about ethics in 
government and about the spending situation. 
He was a speaker at a Common Cause 
banquet that we had. I guess you don’t really 
consider these kinds of people as friends... 
acquaintances is what you are. 

There are a lot of people in the legislature 
that I admire. I think Sue Wagner is absolutely 
marvelous. She’s been there 16 years now, I 
think. She’s able to be her own person. While 
the Republican party obviously has a more 
conservative agenda where people issues 
are concerned, Sue has still worked to meet 
the needs of the people in this state. If we’re 
going to have a woman governor of this state 
sometime, she’d certainly be one that I would 
look strongly to support—even though I’m a 
Democrat and she’s a Republican. It doesn’t 
matter. We’ve worked together. 

I’ve had a good rapport, good working 
relationships with most of the people down 
there in Carson City, although some come 
and go so quickly you barely get to know 
them. We’ve also been changing hands lately, 
as far as our Washington representatives are 
concerned. I endorsed Howard Cannon when 
he ran. There was a very good reason for 
that: Chic Hecht was his opponent. I did not 
support him then and I do not support him 
now. He represents the extreme right element 
in the state of Nevada, in my opinion. 

I have not been happy with a lot of the 
votes that Chic Heck has cast in Washington. 


During my visits bad in Washington, the 
clear analysis of his abilities that came to 
me via the people that I met and talked with 
was that he was not doing Nevada any favors 
being our representative. I felt that way, too. 
Chic Hecht is running for the Senate again. 
I remember his campaign so well when he 
ran before. It was run by some people out of 
Southern California, and I think they knew 
that he was not the kind of man who ought 
to be exposed to the public if they wanted to 
get him elected. I’m serious. They hid him. 
You never saw him, and you’re not seeing him 
again in this election. You’re seeing all these 
people talking about Chic Hecht, but you are 
not seeing Chic Hecht. I think that that’s very 
interesting, because I think that he owes it to 
the voters of the state of Nevada to say these 
things himself if he wants us to believe him. 

I think Harry Reid will make a good 
senator. He’s been in politics a long time. He 
was lieutenant governor; he served on the 
gaming board; he served in the legislature; 
he served in the House. So he has had the 
experience. I think we’re seeing some benefits 
coming out of his election. He’s putting a 
water thing together where he’s calling all 
these people in and trying to negotiate some 
sort of a workable solution. It appears today 
that maybe they’ve reached some sort of 
understanding that will help a little. His hands 
are going to be tied, and so is the group that 
he’s working with, because of laws that are 
involved. I think that he is a caring man and 
he’s honest, but he’s certainly not my idea of a 
liberal Democrat. I think he’s a very moderate 
Democrat. 

Barbara Vucanovich is beginning to talk 
about things now. [laughs] Barbara’s votes 
obviously are not very compatible with mine. 
But that’s not true in everything—sometimes 
I agree with her votes. She’s like the rest 



Reflections on Nevada Politics 


77 


of us. When we enter public office, there’s 
no training ground for a mayor...there’s no 
training ground for your first trip back to 
Washington. I think that she’s more articulate 
in the positions that she takes. I just don’t 
happen to agree with them. And I really 
dislike political expediency where issues are 
concerned. Barbara Vucanovich has been 
in Washington two terms already, and now 
all of a sudden she’s talking about child care 
because this has become a great selling point 
nationally. 

I don’t approve of the way that the 
Republicans think they can solve the problem. 
I think the problem is too acute. But they 
seem to believe that the private sector can 
solve everything, and it cant. I think that 
we’ve seen so much proof of this over the last 
several years. I don’t understand why there is 
this thinking that everything that is healthy 
and good for this country comes from the 
private sector, and everything that is bad and 
rotten comes from government, no matter 
what level. 

People who think like that figure that the 
government can run on fewer and fewer bucks, 
no matter what their level of income is. It 
could be decimated, and they’d still think that 
they could get by on less. People don’t grant 
the same concessions to government that 
they grant to business. In other words, they 
don’t let people who are elected by the people 
decide how the money can best be spent. 
They make those decisions for themselves, 
but they don’t like the idea that government 
is free to make them. I really believe that 
government has an obvious, necessary role in 
a lot of elements of our democracy at local, 
state, and national levels. That may be the 
basic premise of the Democratic party, but it 
should be the basic premise of democracy, not 
just the Democratic party! I think that should 


be a premise for Republicans, Independents, 
and everyone alike. 

I’m not at all involved anymore with the 
Democratic party. There were times when 
I was somewhat active and did my turn 
in helping with conventions and serving 
on committees. I didn’t exactly give up, 
because I still follow party politics, but I’m 
no longer active in it. I dislike party politics 
intensely. I dislike Republican party politics; 
I dislike Democratic party politics. There’s 
an underlying reason: these someones- the 
political mucky-mucks in the state—get their 
heads together and they decide who they want 
to run for office. The people are not making 
that decision most of the time—somebody is 
making it for them. Certainly someone can 
drop into the race and run, but the parties 
know who they’re going to support; who they 
will not actively support; who they don’t want 
to see run. That’s my problem with politics. 

There is this power structure behind 
things that thinks they can mold a candidate 
to the platform of the party, whether it be 
Democratic or Republican politics. For 
example, they want someone to run for 
governor, but that person strays from the 
party line in one or two areas and they want 
that person brought back in line. That doesn’t 
work for me. I certainly don’t have a problem 
with all Republicans, and I certainly don’t 
with all Democrats. But I think that there’s 
too much of that. 

When I came out of the Reno mayoralty 
primary victorious, there were a bunch of 
big-wheel Democrats who met in Vegas. They 
wanted to know what the hell they were going 
to do about that crazy woman up in Reno who 
just might win the general election, [laughs] 
That’s the sort of thing I’m talking about. In 
the first place, they want somebody that they 



78 


Barbara Bennett 


think can win, and it wasn’t until after the 
primary that they realized I might. So I didn’t 
scare them any until then. I know that they 
sensed that I was not the kind of person that 
they could mold into their own image. It’s my 
opinion that they don’t like to deal with those 
things. That’s why I don’t like party politics. 

Nevada’s special interests which prevail 
are probably worse than those in Washington, 
D.C. They are the ones that have the money, 
they are the ones that have always been a part 
of the power structure; they are the ones that 
got us where we are today. And they will keep 
us there if we don’t strive to change it. 

I believe that one of the big problems 
in government today at all levels is that we 
simply do not trust our elected officials. 
Until the day comes when elected officials 
are willing to go these extra steps where 
ethics and government are concerned, we 
are not going to change what is happening 
in government today. You do it by speaking 
out constantly, but you don’t say one thing 
to the public one time and another thing the 
next. If you tell them you’re not going to take 
special interest money, you don’t take it. You 
tell them that we have a problem with air 
pollution—they’re not stupid, they can look 
outside and see that it’s a problem, and they 
know what’s causing it. They want someone to 
tell them that they’re willing to do something 
about these problems. But it’s hard to get these 
kinds of people to run in an election. I am an 
exception, sad to say. 

When Ronald Reagan was sworn in in 
1980, the country began a move toward 
becoming ultra-conservative, ultra-right¬ 
wing. I’m conservative in very many ways, 
but this was an ultra-right-wing swing. I think 
Nevada is one of the most right-winged states 
in the nation today. That process has been a 


gradual one, and I wish I could account for 
it, but I can’t. 

I happen to personally believe that 
this is the most corrupt administration in 
Washington, D.C., in the history of this 
country. They’re all getting rich off one 
another. The ethics questions are there, 
regardless of Oliver North and Ed Meese, who 
heads up the justice system in this country. 
Then there’s the Pentagon. We have been 
starving our social programs to build up our 
military, and now we find that probably as 
much as billions could have been going into 
the pockets of crooked people who have used 
crooked politicians, or they couldn’t have 
achieved this. I think that a reaction to this 
type of politics is what got me elected mayor 
in 1979. 

I wish that the world, the city, and the state 
were full of people who want to run for office 
only because they want to serve—not because 
they hope to gain any personal or financial 
advantage from it. There are some of those 
around and we have to find them. We have to 
do something legally to stop this proliferation 
of PACs and the spending of money to run for 
office, because it’s absolutely asinine. 

Let’s say I wanted to run against 
Vucanovich—and this is not to say that I do. 
How do you raise the money to do that? I was 
elected mayor because I could essentially still 
walk the city of Reno. When you get to looking 
at a statewide broad-scoped office, you can’t 
confine it to where you can walk. You’ve got to 
have money. Anyone running for office should 
be able to do that on the basis of contributions 
from people who live within the state... from 
those people you’re going to represent. But 
I think that limitations absolutely must be 
placed on campaign spending. They say that 
there are some legal niceties about this that are 



Reflections on Nevada Politics 


79 


very troublesome. They say that you can’t stop 
people from giving any amount of money that 
they want to a candidate unless it is prohibited 
by federal election laws. But the lawyers that 
I’ve talked to seem to believe that you can limit 
expenditures. And if you limit expenditures, 
then a candidate for office has no reason to 
go around collecting all the money that they 
can get their hands on.. 

We’ve got all these splits now. We’ve got 
labor unions giving to Democrats, and we’ve 
got big business giving to Republicans, and 
occasionally they play both ends. They give 
to both sides so that their butt is covered 
no matter who’s elected. But the democratic 
process is not supposed to work that way, 
because what it amounts to is that we’re 
buying public office. It’s open to the highest 
bidder. 




8 


Epilogue 


I’ve always been extremely competitive, 
and it didn’t matter whether I was competing 
with men or women. I think that that gets you 
over any fear of competition, whether it’s in a 
debating arena or playing a game. However, 
there were disappointments I experienced 
as mayor. One disappointment was the fact 
that I never was able to get the kinds of 
information from our planning staff that I 
saw as being critical to a really sane growth 
policy with which we could live comfortably. I 
didn’t want anything cast in stone, but instead 
something that could be changed if a better 
thing came along. But I never was able to get 
the cumulative information I wanted. In other 
words, we had a lot of projects backed up. 
When I go to review a new project, I want to 
know exactly what resources it will require— 
what kind of traffic it will generate, the need 
for new police officers, new fire stations, new 
schools, new parks, all of the streets. Can we 
handle it?...can we afford it? 

The planning staff should have been 
doing that. But the planning staff takes its 
orders, presumably, from the city council and 


I was sitting in a position where obviously 
not everyone agreed with me on the Reno 
City Council. To this day, they do not have 
sufficient information on which to base a 
decision to approve or disapprove a project. 

It is painful to look back over a lot of 
this, because I really was not successful in 
accomplishing what I wanted to. When I see 
what’s happening today, I realize how tragic it 
is. I don’t know...if there had been some other 
way to do it, I didn’t know what it was. 

One thing I would like to see more of, 
which has been a major disappointment, is 
voter turnout. It has been a huge problem in 
local government. When people really care 
about a community, how they can stay home 
on election day is beyond me-I don’t care 
whether it’s a city, county, state, or federal 
election. Their voice is cast with their vote. 
I would certainly like to see someone in a 
public role today attempting to encourage 
more people to vote. 

It’s hard to say what I’m proud of. One 
of the things was the state award that I got 



82 


Barbara Bennett 


from Common Cause for leadership in the 
public interest It was rewarding and brought 
me great pride. That was in 1980. Then two 
years later, I received the National Governing 
Award from National Common Cause. It was 
one of five national awards for leadership 
in the public interest. Names are submitted 
from all over the country for that. All of the 
states submit names, along with why people 
are being nominated for this. I was one of five 
chosen, and I’m extremely proud of that. I was 
shocked, because I didn’t think anybody knew 
about a little old lady from Reno, Nevada. 

As to my accomplishments while mayor, 
getting the ethics law passed was important, 
but I think more importantly at that time, 
the first and best thing that I did for Reno 
was to really establish the Reno Planning 
Commission and our planning staff. I didn’t 
do that alone, obviously. That was something 
on which the early council and I agreed, and 
we got it. 

Another thing I’m proud of is that I have 
made a very persistent on-going insistence to 
label what water we have, and to not approve 
anything for which we do not have sufficient 
water. As time goes on, I think I’m more 
and more often being proven accurate in my 
assessments of things that are going to come 
down the road if we do not deal with water 
availability as a serious element of planning. 
Here we are—still trying to deal with it, and 
the situation is far more critical. 

The thing that maybe I ought to take the 
greatest pride in, and I do feel very good about, 
is bringing the public back in to a very strong 
and meaningful role in city government. They 
became active and showed up at meetings at 
city hail. It didn’t sway the votes normally, 
because here we were still sitting with the 
development forces on one side and the 
people on the other. The public was really 
getting involved, and they have remained 


involved. You still see neighborhood groups 
functioning around town. You see them 
showing up at council meetings expressing 
their approval or disapproval of things. 

I did make recommendations and in 
numerous instances was able to get people 
appointed to boards and commissions. The 
people represented a broad cross-section 
of the community. One of these boards was 
CPPAC—the Citizens Planning and Policy 
Advisory Committee. I also established very 
good working relationships with the minority 
communities in town. I don’t think that that 
ever had been done before. 

When I arrived in office, I think people 
had high hopes that someone was really 
going to be doing what they promised them 
to do when they ran for office. And I did 
that. Everyone knew I was honest. There 
was never any question about it, and the 
opportunities for dishonesty are rampant 
in any government. I was able during those 
three-and-a-half years that I was there to 
really give the public a sense of an elected 
official’s honesty, integrity and ethics...to 
let them know that they really mattered for 
something in this city, and that their opinions 
on what they wanted their city to be was as 
important to me as it was to them. 

I never ran for office to get rich, but I 
would have liked to have made enough so that 
I could have stayed. Maybe that’s why no one 
was willing to raise the salary, [laughs] 

There’s been a substantial increase 
in diversifying the economic base in the 
community. This has to be beneficial in view 
of the fact that we’re seeing the potential 
for gaming being discussed in a lot of other 
communities, such as Atlantic City, and 
various lotteries in states like California. What 
that says to me is that we no longer have an 
exclusive claim where gaming is concerned. 



Epilogue 


83 


We’re going to have to share this, which means 
that we’re probably going to lose some of these 
tourists to other communities. I also believe 
that the national economy is a factor in how 
gaming does. 

I think that it has always been fairly 
dear, as far as economic diversification is 
concerned, that Nevada has a lot of plusses. 
We have no corporate tax, we are a freeport 
state, we have no personal income tax, and I 
know that when we discussed with business 
people the positive aspects of Nevada as far 
as economic diversification was concerned, 
those were the kinds of things that were 
important to them. It was also important to a 
lot of those people that we show an indication 
of the willingness to move away from making 
gaming the absolute major source of economy 
in this state. I think there’s been a great deal 
of success. 

Because of the freeport law, we’ve had a 
substantial warehousing industry, and that 
has grown a great deal. It’s grown to where 
we no longer have the industry just catering 
to smaller-type businesses. We’ve had a 
General Motors plant that’s come in, as well 
as Porsche...every day now you pick up the 
paper and read about a new industry that is 
moving into the area, and very often it falls 
into that category of business. But we’re also 
still attracting a lot of other types of industries, 
and a major factor in that has been EDAWN. 
It has brought business people together that 
were interested in economic diversification. 
Since its founding it has really continued to 
thrive and has been very effective. 

It is still my strong belief that we have not 
paid sufficient attention to how we make our 
available resources fit with any kind of growth, 
whether it be economic diversification or 
continued expansion of the gaming industry. 
I don’t believe that that has been addressed 
sufficiently yet. 


I was interviewed by the Gazette in 
November of 1980. We discussed the growth 
issue, and, of course, gaming. A lot of casinos 
have closed in Reno since then, so that 
indicates that the gaming industry is also 
vulnerable. Most of the casinos that have 
closed have been individually owned and 
operated—small-type casinos. It’s really sad 
because that’s the sort of thing that Reno was 
built on: the economy of the small casinos. 
The small casinos were really having trouble 
surviving, much the same as the motel 
operators. 

I believe that corporate gaming is 
essentially healthy. The large hotels like Circus 
Circus and the Nugget in Sparks have been 
well run and operated. The Nugget has had 
almost exclusive rights in the Sparks area, and 
it is succeeding very well. 

There’s been a move from years ago, when 
there were 5- and 10-cent slot machines 
that brought in a lot of seniors who couldn’t 
afford to play dollar slots, or even the 25-cent 
machines. Those machines literally supported 
gaming in this community for many years. I 
suppose that economic necessities were the 
reason for the changes to more expensive 
machines, so that overhead costs could be 
paid and a profit could be made. I know even 
when I was in office I had groups of people 
from around Roseville and Sacramento, 
California—particularly seniors clubs-that 
used to get a busload and come up here. 
They used to come up and enjoy playing the 
nickel and dime slot machines. They said it 
became more and more difficult to have their 
money last long enough so they could have 
a little fun and go home. But obviously the 
gaming community felt that the nickel and 
dime players were not what this community 
needed. As a matter of fact, an attitude seemed 
to develop that we needed to get away from 
the small-time attitude and move towards 



84 


Barbara Bennett 


the direction that Las Vegas successfully had 
taken. 

I had always hoped that we would never 
become a city like Las Vegas. I think that’s why 
a lot of us love the place, and we didn’t want 
to see another Las Vegas here. Yet, today we’re 
seeing this comparison between how much 
Las Vegas is growing and how many hotel- 
casinos they have, compared to our somewhat 
slower rate of growth. I think the comparisons 
are very unfair. The population down there 
wants this kind of expansion. When it comes 
time for them to deal with the water problems 
and the cost of it, then it’s up to the people of 
that community to make a decision. They have 
apparently decided that they don’t mind all 
this growth scattered all over the community 
in hotel-casinos. But the people in Reno made 
it clear they didn’t want that 

There was an article in the paper where 
someone said that Las Vegas casinos do so 
much more for their community than Reno 
casinos do. Certainly, the person who rote 
the article probably didn’t have any dear 
indication of what local casinos did in the 
way of community service or community 
contributions dollar-wise. I think now that 
maybe as a result, a lot of the casinos are 
making community contributions—more 
than they were advertising. I think also that 
there is a greater generosity on the part of the 
casinos in the community. I sense that they 
are contributing more now to social programs 
and things than has ever been true in the past. 

Redevelopment in the downtown area 
has been so much slower than I expected it to 
be. Progress can only be measured in inches, 
in my opinion. For instance, we’ve had these 
corners down there that have been the cause 
of a lot of disputes and arguments in the 
community because they were so slick that 
people have slipped on them. The city is still 
working on these corners. 


Several months ago there was some 
money appropriated from the downtown 
redevelopment fund to improve the alleys in 
downtown Reno. It wasn’t two weeks when 
that alley work was underway. That was 
because the alleys run between casinos down 
there, and those people are in a position to 
exert some pressure to get this work done. 
Well, I guess it was six weeks—no longer 
than eight weeks—that some of the alleys 
were completed. One alley that runs north 
and south between Harold’s and Harrah’s 
dubs was finished in nothing flat. Now if we 
can finish an alley that fast so that we don’t 
inconvenience gaming patrons, why can’t 
we finish these street corners? That slowness 
really puzzles me. 

Another thing that is bothering me is 
that I am not seeing beautification in Reno. 
There should be some greenery and some 
nice benches and areas where people can sit 
out and have lunch...a break away from the 
casinos for a bit, where they’d be breathing 
some fresh air. I am disappointed that this 
hasn’t happened. Obviously Reno has been 
cleaned up. But if we still have as many 
absentee landowners in the downtown area 
as we did when I was in office, we’re going to 
continue to have a problem with preserving 
whatever we do down there. Unless the 
property owners are willing to be responsible 
for keeping the front of their areas cleaned and 
beautified, we’re going to continue to have a 
problem. 

The long-time business people in Reno 
have always taken good care of their property, 
I think, because they face the public. I don’t 
get downtown that often anymore, so maybe 
they’ve made progress beyond that which I’m 
aware of. As far as the downtown buildings are 
concerned, I think there are more restrictions 
in the building code now than there were at 
the time of the construction of Circus Circus. 



Epilogue 


85 


Once a year the newspaper runs “The Best 
and Worst of Reno.” In the downtown, Circus 
Circus has won the most ugly building and 
for many years...I kind of lost track of it. It 
isn’t something I’m proud of. I think Circus 
Circus is gaudy, and it certainly doesn’t add 
to beautification of downtown Reno. 

I have always had mixed feelings over 
water meters. I really understand that they are 
a tremendous conservation method. However, 
in fact they do not generate an additional drop 
of water. They are a conservation method 
because they are compelling the existing 
population to use less water. Now, while the 
population has continued to grow, this year 
Sierra Pacific allocated about an acre-foot per 
family. Then the allocation dropped to three- 
quarters, and now it’s down below that. If they 
get their way, I feel that we’re soon going to 
be down to about one-fifth of an acre-foot, 
which is going to create more problems than 
we have. 

I have a lawn out there and I have trees. 
I’ve been growing them for 18 years at this 
location. They provide a certain aesthetic 
satisfaction for me, but they also provide 
oxygen and cooler air. But we’re seeing people 
removing trees and lawns, and planting rock 
and what-have-you. That isn’t the kind of 
community that I want to live in, quite frankly. 
I believe that we can all be very conservative 
in the use of water while still maintaining our 
gardens and lawns. For instance, I do a lot of 
drip watering, but we are absolutely at the 
mercy of the weather, and we have a terrible 
drought situation this year. 

A lot of people in other communities 
meter their water. The cost to install the 
meters would also be over $300,1 heard. So 
you have a substantial investment just in the 
water meter. We’ve seen the result of water 
meters in other communities like Mann 


County and San Francisco. Water was scarce, 
but the smaller amount of water the people 
used, the more the cost was. That was because 
the water provider there felt that they had to 
have a certain amount of income. That same 
thing would be a cinch to happen here. If they 
were selling less water than they needed to 
make their 14 percent profit that they were 
allowed, they’d raise the cost for water. So 
eventually we’d be using less water, and it 
would cost us more to do so. That scenario 
has always troubled me, so I’ve always felt 
that one of the solutions, if they want water 
meters, was to have the purveyor in the area 
provide them. 

The other thing that I do not believe is 
that profits should be made through passing 
associated costs on to everybody. I do believe 
that water should be metered during drought 
times when it’s really in everyone’s best 
interest, but at other times, when that water 
is rushing down the river and we have no 
shortage, metering water is wrong. 

Many people come to our community 
who really don’t have an interest in the water 
shortage, like the people who come and stay in 
the casinos. But I think that the responsibility 
lies with the casino operators. For instance, 
during this drought and the one in 1977, water 
was not served in restaurants and such unless 
you asked for it. Yet at the time I recall being 
in one of the hotels, where they constantly 
ran the water in the bar. And here we were 
at home, putting bricks in our toilets and 
restricters on our showers. But the tourists 
are not even familiar with the problem, and 
are not interested, and how can you expect 
them to be? 

My attitude long before I was elected 
and through today is that people who are 
responsible for making those kinds of 
decisions in the community—in this case the 
Reno City Council —should not ever allocate 



86 


Barbara Bennett 


growth of any kind that is in excess of the 
resources that are available to them. If they 
have 1,200 acre-feet of water, and they allocate 
it all to one project, then what should happen? 
In my opinion, if they think that project is so 
important, but they have nothing to allocate, 
then they shouldn’t approve anything more 
until the purveyor of water has x-number 
more gallons of water in the area. 

I was so active for so many years, sometimes 
at the expense of family gatherings—especially 
when I was mayor. I really needed to get back 
to the family and have more time with my 
grandkids and with everyone. I needed less 
political involvement in my life. You really 
get a bit burned out after all the years, but I 
maintain an absolute interest in politics, in the 
people who serve in office, and government 
at all levels. 

I have very strong opinions as far as my 
political philosophy is concerned, and it has 
probably been apparent throughout this entire 
oral history. I have a personal philosophy to 
live by: I have always refused to do anything 
that would make me feel uncomfortable or 
that I would not like myself for. if I can’t like 
myself, I don’t think anyone else can like me. 
I’ve tried to be fair, honest, and caring. I care 
about a lot of things and a lot of people. I think 
that as Americans, it’s our responsibility to 
care about others, so when we can contribute 
to organizations or causes that we feel are 
important, we do so. 

Philosophically, I’m a fiscal conservative, 
obviously, because I’ve always had to be. In 
my personal life I’m also fiscally conservative. 
I believe that an elected official has a 
responsibility to handle the public’s money 
as carefully and as wisely as they’re willing 
to handle their own, so I’m conservative in 
that sense. I’m conservative about some other 


things that I’ve taken some heat over, [laughs] 
I can recall when we had this really high 
unemployment dear back in the late 1970s, 
early 1980s, and we had a lot of aliens coming 
into the country. I know what the Statue of 
Liberty says, and we’ve always opened our 
arms to people from other countries. But at 
that time I felt-and said so publicly-that it was 
very unwise to bring in all of these people at 
that time when we did not have the means for 
looking after our own. 

I believe that a country is only as strong 
as its people are willing to make it strong, if 
you destroy a country from the inside out—if 
you have so many poor; so many unhoused; so 
many people who lack medical care; so many 
people who work, only to never get that other 
foot up the ladder—you have a population 
that may not be there when you need them 
some day. if you want these people to fight 
for this country, believe in it, work for it, to 
speak positively of it, then every segment of 
our society is entitled to the same respect and 
the same opportunities. I’m sorry to say that I 
still don’t believe that they all are. I think there 
are a lot of things that need to be worked on, 
and if that’s a liberal attitude, I certainly make 
no apologies for it. 

One of the main problems I have with the 
Reagan administration is that they say that we 
have not structurally harmed the country, but 
I disagree-I believe that we have. If you have 
a country where the infrastructure is falling 
apart... The government is not putting up the 
monies out of a trust fund to take care of the 
highways, for example. I don’t believe that the 
philosophy of our founding fathers was to do 
away with a lot of things that belong to the 
people by selling them off to private industry. 
It’s certainly not my philosophy. If something 
is owned by the people, it ought to stay m 
the hands of the people, unless they give the 



Epilogue 


87 


government permission to do otherwise. 
Our system of government unfortunately 
does not say that it’s necessary to go to the 
public and ask them if they want to sell part 
of their public parks so someone can chop 
timber, or put a housing unit in. I feel very 
strongly about those things. Infrastructure 
also includes things like water. The entire 
West, especially, is in the midst of one of the 
worst droughts ever experienced in history, 
and obviously something has to be done to 
solve the water problems. Local governments 
cannot afford it, so help has to come from the 
federal government, in my opinion. 

On the national level, taxes have been 
reduced, and I suppose you can make a 
successful argument for that if you’re talking 
in certain areas. Some people have certainly 
been helped a lot more than others. But I 
believe that the upper strata of people in this 
country have been helped far more than the 
middle class or the lower middle class under 
the Reagan administration. That’s inarguable. 
Things hurt. They want to take government 
off the backs of people? Well, they don’t mind 
putting government on the people’s backs in 
certain ways, like wire taps and forced testing 
for drugs. I believe if our constitution says 
anything, it says that those things are illegal. I 
can say that knowing full well how important 
it is to deal with the drug problems in the 
country. But when you’re willing to wiretap 
and to see the kinds of things that we’ve 
seen in Washington with people personally 
benefiting.... Those all really run against my 
philosophical cord. 

If there were some way to be a part of the 
political scene and decision-making process 
while still fulfilling my other responsibilities, 
I would still like very much to be involved. 
But I have no guilt about not being involved, 
because we all have our priorities. When our 


kids were growing up, John and I would tell 
them, “Your family is everything. You’ve got 
brothers and sisters in school. Look after 
them, because you’re going to have your 
family your whole life. It’s the only thing in 
your life that is going to be constant if you 
will let it be.” 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



90 


Barbara Bennett 


A 

Armstrong, Leola, 107 
Associated General Contrac¬ 
tors (AGC) (Reno), 80, 82, 
83 


Bryan, Richard "Dick," 95, 
96,97 

Business and Professional 
Women (BPW) (Reno), 
23-24 


B 

Benet, Merle, 106 
Bennett, Barbara: ances¬ 
tors/family, 1-3, 4-7, 8, 11; 
childhood/youth, 2-11, 21; 
education, 9-10, 21-22; 
employment, 8-11,17-20, 
99-104; marriage/family, 
13-16, 17, 35, 126, 128-129; 
as mayor/city council 
member, 47-97 
Bennett, John, 13-15, 52-53 
Bennett, Sherry, 32 
Biglieri, Clyde, 54, 74 
Blue Ribbon Task Force 
Report (1974), 37-38 
Bode, Ken, 28 
Brunette, B 



Cashell, Bob, 96 
Casino industry. See Gaming 
industry; individual casinos 
Cherches, Chris, 61 
Citizen Policy Planning Advi¬ 
sory Committee (Reno), 76 
City manager office (Reno), 
61-62 

Civil Service Con 
(Reno), 66 
Common 


Archie," 104- 
(Newton) family, 56 


131 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


91 


Day, Kevin, 89 
DeCosta, Marge, 23 
Defense industry (World 
War II), 10-11 
Democratic/Republican 
party politics, 114-115 
Dibitonto, Sam, 24 
Discrimination, 18, 19-20, 22- 
23, 26 

Dodge, Carl F., 108 
Durant, Marcel, 74 


Eadington, Bill, 41-42, 88 
Eckert, Richard, 38 
Economic Development 
Authority of Western 
Nevada (EDAWN) (Reno), 
89 

Equal Rights Amendmeni 
(ERA), 29-32, 33 
Etchemendy, 

55-56,5! 

ad 



Fahrendorf, Bob, 101 
Falcon’s Nest condominiums 
(Reno), 71 

Fitzgerald, Lincoln, 51 
Ford, Jean, 27 
Francis, John, 75 
Francis, Steve, 94, 95 
Frazzini, Mary, 23, 27 


Gaming industry (Reno), 51- 
52, 64, 67-71, 74, 90-91, 
122-124 

Giraud, Florence, 33 
Gojack, Mary, 27, 28, 54 
Gold Dust hotel-casino 
(Reno), 68 

Gomes, Nancy, 23, 27 
Granata, Bill, 48-49, 75 
Greene, Stan, 76 


Hall, Jerry, 58 
Handelsman, Mark 
Hansen, Ja 
Harrah’s 


112-113 
on family, 1-2 
Housing (Reno), 22-23, 43-44 
Howard, David, 94-95 
Hunter, Robert, 85 


King, Martin Luther, 22 


Las Vegas, Nevada, 123 
Lauri, Nick, 55 
League of Women Voters, 
25-26 

Lear, Moya, 72 
Lehners, Florence, 82 
Lerude, Warren, 51-52 
Lewis, Pat Hardy, 55 



92 


Barbara Bennett 


M 


Mapes hotel-casino (Reno), 
91 

Martin, Bernice, 66 
Martinelli, Ernie, 65 
McClelland, Joe, 54, 59, 76, 
95 

McGee, Chuck, 100,101 
Meiser, Vera, 89 
Menicucd, Bruno, 41, 48, 50- 
51, 56, 74, 75, 76 
MGM Grand Hotel (Reno), 
68-69, 70 

Miller, Maya, 23, 28 
Moon, Bill, 94 
Myers, Bill, 65 


National Judicial College 
(University of Nevada- 
Reno), 103 

Nevada Bell (Reno), 18, 

20 

Nevada State 
Ethics, 

Nevada 'state Youtn services 
ion (Carson City), 99- 

Northera Nevada Mobile 
Homeowners Association 
(Reno), 33-35 


O 

Oaks, Ed, 41, 67, 75 
Osgood, Ted, 94 
Outland, Orland, 106 


Peters family, 1-3 
Peters, Norma, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6-7, 
8, 11, 53 

Pine, Janice, 56, 67, 75, 79, 

85 

Politics: Nevada, 26-32, 34- 
35, 111-117; Reno city, 24- 
25, 29, 34, 37-97, 121 
Prindiville, Gerald, 106 
Proposition 6 (Reno), 91-92 


Race Relations Center 
(Reno), 22-23 
Rancho San ! 

issue, 54 
Regions 

leno-5 



sportation 

(Reno), 57-58 
sid, Harry, 113 
Reno City Council, 29, 41-42, 
44-45, 48-49, 54, 55-56, 60- 
63, 67-68, 70-72, 74-77, 78- 
80, 82-88, 94 

Reno Commission on the 
Status of Women, 24 
Reno, Nevada, 22-24; city 
govemment/elections in, 
24-25, 29, 34, 37-97, 121; 
development/growth in, 37- 
39, 40-44, 49, 56-57, 59, 64- 
77, 83, 85-86, 87-88, 92-93, 
94-95, 119, 122, 123, 124; 
economic diversification in, 
88-91, 121-122; gaming 
industry in, 51-52, 64, 67, 
71, 74, 90-91, 122-124; 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


93 


housing in, 22-23, 43-44; 
water resources in, 37-39, 
68-69, 74-75, 120, 125-126 
Reno Planning Commission, 
66-67, 94-95, 120 
Republican/Democratic 
party politics. See 
Democratic/Republican 
party politics 
Richter, Don, 48 
Robertson, Joe, 105, 106 
Romo, Carlos, 66, 101 


W 

Wagner, Sue, 112 
Wallace, Bill, 44-45, 49, 67, 
76 

Washoe County Commission, 
37-39 40 41 

Waugh,' Eleanor "Ellie,” 27 
Weinberg, Barbara, 75 
Western Industrial Nevada 
(WIN) (Reno), 89 
Wilson, Bonnie, 48 
Wishart, Kathryn, 94, 95 
Wolfe, Hans, 89-90 



V 


Vucanovich, Barbara, 27, 28- 
29, 45, 71, 113-114 



