The Life of Alton E. Glass 


Interviewee: Alton E. Glass 
Interviewed: 1965 
Published: 1966 
Interviewer: Mary Ellen Glass 
UNOHP Catalog #006 


Description 

Alton E. Glass was interested in, or associated with, agriculture nearly all his life. Born in 1893 on a ranch at San 
Ramon, California, he spent his early childhood on the T. B. Rickey ranch in eastern California. He remembers 
well the Rickey spread, and the details of ranch life there. Mr. Glass received his early education at home on the 
Rickey ranch, and later attended schools in California and Reno, Nevada. After leaving the University of Nevada, 
he worked at various engineering jobs in Nevada, California and Texas, finally returning to Reno. There, he became 
associated with First National Bank, and his second—and longest—work in the agricultural field began. Working 
as appraiser for the bank, Glass visited hundreds of farms, ranches and livestock herds in the course of a forty-year 
career. He learned to judge crops and animals with the sure consideration of an expert in both banking and ranching. 
Meanwhile, he observed the development of branch banking and the expansion of financial facilities in Nevada. 

The memoir by Alton E. Glass includes descriptions of life on the Rickey ranch with observations on local people; 
accounts of educational conditions in Reno in the period from 1908 to 1915; vignettes of his work with Shell Oil 
in California and Magnolia Petroleum Company in Texas; the evolution of the First National Bank of Nevada; 
narratives and anecdotes of his work as appraiser for the bank, including economic assessments of nearly every 
rural community in Nevada; and a philosophical conclusion. Mr. Glass died in May, 1966. 



The Life of Alton E. Glass 




The Life of Alton E. Glass 


An Oral History Conducted by Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1966 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1966. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction xi 

1. My Early Life as a California Country Boy 1 

2. Reno, 1908-1915 7 

3. Early Employment 13 

4. Beginnings of the First National Bank 21 

5. My Work as Appraiser 27 

6. Summary and Conclusion 41 

Original Index: For Reference Only 


43 




Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Alton E. Glass 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Alton E. Glass was interested in, or 
associated with agriculture nearly all his 
life. Born in 1893 on a ranch at San Ramon, 
California, he spent his early childhood on 
the T. B. Rickey ranch in eastern California. 
He remembered well the Rickey “spread,” 
and the details of ranch life there. Mr. Glass 
received his early education at home on the 
Rickey ranch, and later attended schools 
in California and Reno, Nevada. After 
leaving the University of Nevada, he worked 
at various engineering jobs in Nevada, 
California and Texas, finally returning to 
Reno. There, he became associated with 
First National Bank, and his second—and 
longest—work in the agricultural field 
began. Working as appraiser for the bank, 
Glass visited hundreds of farms, ranches and 
livestock herds in the course of a forty-year 
career. He learned to judge crops and animals 
with the sure consideration of an expert in 
both banking and ranching. Meanwhile, 
he observed the development of branch 
banking and the expansion of financial 
facilities in Nevada. 


Mr. Glass responded enthusiastically 
to the invitation to record his life history, 
at a time when he was confined to his 
home by illness. There were five interviews 
between September 15 and October 12, 
1965. Although he was ill, Mr. Glass made a 
thorough presentation of his story. He died 
in May, 1966. 

The memoir by Alton E. Glass includes 
descriptions of life on the Rickey ranch with 
observations on local people; accounts of 
educational conditions in Reno in the period 
from 1908 to 1915; vignettes of his work 
with Shell Oil in California and Magnolia 
Petroleum Company in Texas; the evolution 
of the First National Bank of Nevada; 
narratives and anecdotes of his work as 
appraiser for the bank, including economic 
assessments of nearly every rural community 
in Nevada; and a philosophical conclusion. 

The Oral History Project of the Center for 
Western North American Studies attempts 
to preserve the past and the present for 
researchers by recording the life stories 
of persons who have had a part in the 



Alton E. Glass 


xii 


development of Nevada and the West. Other 
oral histories in progress concurrently with 
Mr. Glass’s included interviews with Silas E. 
Ross, former University of Nevada Regent; 
I. A. Lougaris, A Greek immigrant fruit 
peddler who became a prominent Nevada 
attorney; Rufus Adams, grandson of a 
pioneer of Carson Valley; Jenny M. Bruns, 
a teacher in some of the state’s now-decayed 
mining camps; and Mildred N. Bray, former 
state Superintendent of Public Instruction. 
We are grateful to the University of Nevada 
Department of Agricultural Economics for 
assistance in preparation of this script. 

Permission to cite or quote from Mr. 
Glass’s oral history should be obtained 
through the Center for Western North 
American Studies. 

Mary Ellen Glass 
University of Nevada, 1966 



1 


My Early Life as a 
California Country Boy 


This document will be the life history of 
Alton Earle Glass from the year 1893 up to 
the present moment. My father was Frederick 
Elmer Glass, a farmer and rancher in the San 
Ramon Valley in Contra Costa County in 
California. The family consisted of father and 
mother and two sisters at the time I was born. 
The family lived in a little community called 
San Ramon where father operated a small 
farm and ranch of his own. It was a portion 
of the original Glass ranch which grandfather, 
David Glass, took up in the year 1848. The 
property was a part of the old Vallejo Spanish 
Grant which consisted of an empire that went 
from the Bay area inland as far as Vacaville of 
the present time; and from north to south 
from Marysville almost to Stockton, 
California. Father raised beef. He butchered 
and sold this beef in Berkeley, California, 
which was the headquarters of most of the 
beef industry around the Bay area at that time. 
At one time, Father was veterinary for the big 
Miller and Lux ranching concern of the West 
Coast. He was subsequently offered the job as 
superintendent for the T. B. Rickey enterprises 


with headquarters at Topaz, California. In 
1893, when I was six weeks old, the family 
moved from San Ramon to Topaz, where 
father took up his duties as superintendent 
for the Rickey company. The T. B. Rickey 
spread was a concern which represented 
200,000 acres under fee simple title, and 
controlled some 10,000,000 acres of land from 
Bishop, California, to Lake Tahoe. The last 
count made on the cattle was in 1900. At that 
time, the overall count was 35,000 head of 
animals. There is no question in my mind but 
that some 4,000 to 5,000 animals were never 
counted in this figure. Where Father had been 
a veterinarian for Miller and Lux, he was not 
a trained veterinarian inasmuch as he did not 
have a degree; however, he had a peculiar 
knack of being able to handle almost any 
animal disease that showed up. Before the 
turn of the century, anthrax and black leg were 
two of the most vicious diseases in livestock 
at that period. It is my recollection that in 
1898, the summer saw 1,800 head of cattle die 
from this anthrax. It was necessary to hire a 
special crew which covered the carcasses as 



2 


Alton E. Glass 


they dropped and burned the animals on the 
spot to try to eradicate the disease. At that 
time, there were no vaccines which were 
absolute certain disease-proof controls. Mr. 
T. B. Rickey was a very dynamic character, but 
he was also a very ruthless man. It was Mr. 
Rickey’s ambition to control or own the entire 
Antelope Valley area. However, there were 
many stubborn farmers in the area who were 
just as adamant in controlling their little areas 
as Mr. Rickey was in controlling and 
augmenting his areas. Mr. Rickey, during the 
period that we were in the Topaz Valley, broke 
many of the small farmers and subsequently 
acquired their property to add to his acreage 
in his effort to control the entire area. Some 
of the local people who were operating in the 
valley were the old Chichester family, the Pitts 
family, the Radley family, the Hardy family, 
the Trumble family, the McKay family, the 
Powell family, and the McAllister family. 
Some of these operators were sheep men as 
well as cattlemen, and sheep were simply 
taboo as far as T. B. Rickey was concerned. 
His main effort to control the valley was to 
get rid of all the sheepmen that he possibly 
could. However, some of these old operators 
were men who had priorities over T. B. Rickey 
and it was impossible to buy or force them 
out of the picture. In the actual cattle 
operation, the steers were marked as soon as 
possible in the late spring. These animals were 
never disturbed until four years later, when 
they were gathered, put into feed yards, fed 
loose alfalfa and some grain for 100 to 140 
days and driven from the Topaz area to 
Carson City, Nevada, where they were sold. 
Beef, before the turn of the century, was from 
big-boned, high-shouldered Durham animals. 
The steers, when driven to market, would be 
the light end at 1,600 pounds, and the heavy 
end up to 2,000 pounds. It took four days to 


drive the beef from the Topaz areas into 
Carson City, which was a distance of 42 miles. 
The beef delivered at Carson City brought 4.5 
cents live weight. In 10 years time, Mr. Rickey 
made a sizeable fortune on the sale of this 
beef. I do not recall ever seeing a cow or a 
heifer go to the market. They were saved for 
replacements for the animals, because the 
death loss was way in excess of today’s 
averages. A good cow could be purchased for 
$25 to $30, and an excellent bull could be 
purchased at $100. At the start of the operation 
in that particular valley they did have the 
Mono National Forest which went from the 
Bishop area almost to Lake Tahoe. However, 
the forest control was not too big a problem 
at that time, as the campers and summer 
residents had not discovered the magnificent 
areas in the Bridgeport and Bishop countries. 
The Forest Service was practically started in 
the year 1888 in this particular area. Mr. 
William Mall was the chief Forest Ranger, and 
he controlled the region from Bishop to Lake 
Tahoe. At the inception of the Forest Service 
in that area, there were some 45,000 head of 
cattle which were summered on the summer 
ranges which now comprise the June Lakes 
area, the Bridgeport areas, and the Long 
Valley area where Crowley Lake is now 
located. At the present time, some of the fine 
areas such as June Lakes, the Twin Lakes in 
the Bridgeport area have been taken out of 
grazing use and are now used for recreational 
purposes. It is my understanding that in the 
year 1960 the maximum permits for livestock 
on the Mono National Forest—now called the 
Toiyabe National Forest—was 18,000 head of 
cattle, maximum. Mr. William Mall, who was 
the Chief Forest Ranger for the area, was a 
thorough livestock man. He also understood 
forage, browse, the different types of forest 
trees, and the limits to which an area would 



My Early Life as a California Country Boy 


3 


carry certain numbers of livestock. Mr. Rickey 
and Mr. Mall were at loggerheads at all times, 
because Rickey felt that he was being cramped 
by Mall’s style of designating certain numbers 
of cattle for certain particular areas. However, 
Mr. Rickey never won an argument with Mr. 
Mall. And Mr. Mali’s control of the area has 
subsequently shown that he did an excellent 
job from the inception of the Forest Service 
into the present-day operations. In the control 
of the forest areas, during William Mall’s 
administration of the district, things went 
along very smoothly and there were no 
particular serious controversies (except those 
with Rickey) ever arose. However, subsequent 
to Mr. Mali’s retirement from the service, 
there were many men with excellent academic 
backgrounds who were sent to the area to 
administer the Forest Service. They did not 
understand local conditions, and were subject 
to political pressures at all times, so that 
eventually, many, many controversies arose 
over the number of animals which were 
permitted under any particular permit for the 
Forest Service. Subsequently, when the Taylor 
Grazing Service was inaugurated (it was 
supposed to supplement the Forest Service in 
areas which were not within the forest 
boundaries) , there were additional 
controversies which arose because of the 
redistribution of permits to some of the old- 
time operators in the area. I remember 
distinctly the Fallon operation on the East 
Walker River which had Forest Permits of 
4,000 head of cattle and grazing permits of 
5,600 head of cattle. Their permits, after the 
fourth year, were cut to 2,000 head of cattie 
on the Mono National Forest and to 1,800 
head of cattle on the open range. Mother was 
Theodosia, the daughter of H. W. Hauxhurst, 
who was an English mining engineer. She was 
born on Victoria Island in B. C, where her 


father was the superintendent of the coal 
mines which were then operating on the 
island of Vancouver. Subsequently, her family 
was transferred to Nortonville and 
Summersville, which were two little towns on 
the base of Mt. Diablo in Contra Costa 
County. There, her father attempted to 
develop some coal stratas which were showing 
at the surface of the ground. These coal mines 
never developed into anything very extensive. 
However, they did continue in operation for 
many years. 

Mother was an honor graduate from the 
San Jose State Normal College at San Jose, 
California. She was subsequently a teacher 
around the Bay area, and was teaching in the 
San Ramon Valley when she met father and 
they were married in the year 1888. Mother 
was very well read and was an excellent 
pianist. She had a knack as a teacher which was 
wonderful. She was one of these teachers that 
insisted on a great deal of memory work. In 
my early days I memorized many poems that 
still stay with me in my subconscious mind. 
Mother was a wonderful mathematician. 
During my grammar school and high school 
work, she saw to it that my mathematics was 
always in the top bracket when the report 
cards came out. Mother taught one year in 
the Topaz area. However, there were so many 
conflicting conditions in the valley at that 
time, that the single year was all that Mother 
ever taught. However, my schooling from 
the start to the fourth grade was strictly from 
Mother’s direct teaching. She also taught the 
older sister and my next sister. My brother 
was born in Carson City in 1894, and that 
rounded the family at two boys and two girls. 
The controversy which stopped Mother from 
teaching school in Topaz is a little vague in my 
mind. However, I do recall that T. B. Rickey 
came out to the home and told Mother that 



4 


Alton E. Glass 


she just simply could not quit that school. 
And, I can distinctly remember Mother 
saying, “I cannot only quit teaching, but I can 
throwyou out of the house if necessary!” I was 
about seven years old when that happened. 

Our family life at Topaz was very simple, 
and the whole mode of living was right with 
the family at practically all times. Father’s 
work required him to be on the job at the 
headquarter’s ranch at five o’clock, which 
meant that he got up at four o’clock in the 
morning to cook his breakfast. I would get 
up and join him for breakfast, he would go 
on to the ranch, and I would wander around 
the house until the rest of the family got up. 

Our nearest neighbor was at least a 
quarter of a mile away. This family was the 
Cardinal family, which was Mr. and Mrs. 
Cardinal and nine children. Our contacts 
with the neighbors in the valley were very 
few and far between. However, there were 
occasions when Mother would dress us up 
in our best clothing and we would go and 
visit this neighbor or that neighbor, which 
meant anywhere from a four to an eight-mile 
drive, and then return home afterward. The 
community was not very strong on picnics 
or get-togethers. However, occasionally an 
itinerant preacher would come through 
the area, and then the entire valley would 
turn out for the services, irrespective of the 
denomination the preacher might be. 

Mother was an avid reader and was an 
excellent auditory reader. Mother insisted on 
the latest books and we had quite an extensive 
library. The evenings were usually spent in an 
hour or more of auditory reading. 

Food for the family was no particular 
problem. Beef, of course, was the staple 
meat; however, the country in the Topaz 
area abounded with all sorts of game, water 
fowl, mountain quail, grouse, sage hen, the 
principal game birds. There were ducks at any 


time of the year, and to have fresh venison 
was a matter of an hour and one-half from 
the home back to the home with the proper 
size deer. 

Every day at four o’clock, the family went 
to what was called the Swager ranch, which 
was the head dairy operation for the T. B. 
Rickey outfit. Each day we would get two 
gallons of fresh milk and a quart of skimmed 
cream. 

Each year there was a Chinaman hired 
to develop fresh vegetables for the operation 
of the ranch. Our family was allowed to use 
any of the vegetables as they were grown. 
The vegetable garden was almost adjoining 
our home property, so as the corn and beans 
and beets and so forth matured, we had fresh 
vegetables from the start of the season to the 
end of the season. 

Mother always made her own bread and 
she was an excellent baker. I can still smell 
the wonderful fragrance of fresh baked bread 
as it came from the oven. Mother always 
developed two dozen raised muffins when 
she baked. These disappeared very rapidly, 
along with the native honey that we had for 
the area, and the unsalted butter which came 
from the dairy. 

My early education, as well as my two 
sisters, was conducted in our home by Mother. 
While we were not a school, our schooling 
started at nine o’clock in the morning and 
went through to 11:30. Then we were called 
into session at 1:30 and continued to 3:30, 
for five days of the week. Mother set the 
advancement of our schooling as she saw fit. 

In 1904 Mother decided that Topaz was 
too isolated an area for a proper education for 
us children, and Father made arrangements 
to leave the T. B. Rickey concern and join up 
with Mr. R. Kirman of Reno, Nevada, on the 
sale of the immense Kirman holdings in the 
Visalia area of Southern California. There, 



My Early Life as a California Country Boy 


5 


my oldest sister entered high school and 
my younger sister, my brother and I went to 
grammar school. 

This transition from an isolated farming 
area into city dwelling was a very serious 
problem especially to myself. I was a green 
country boy. I had had very little access to 
playmates other than our immediate family 
and my whole life had centered around 
the family life at our home. However, I did 
manage to survive the first year that we were 
in Berkeley. 

An interesting item came up when we 
first moved to Berkeley and I went to the 
fifth grade in school. Our teacher, a Miss 
Woodard, was telling about her summer 
experience. It seems that she and a group 
of teachers went on a horseback tour up 
through the Antelope Valley where we lived. 
She recalled an incident as their group came 
into the valley where, as they were riding 
toward Topaz, they intercepted a boy with 
a dead lynx thrown over his shoulder. The 
lynx was an animal of probably 40 pounds, 
and the forepaws were drawn across the boy’s 
chest as he held his rifle. The animal was so 
long it was dragging on the ground. This 
incident seemed to impress Miss Woodard 
very much, and knowing that I happened 
to be the boy that had the lynx over his 
shoulder, she asked the class if there was 
anyone who recalled such an incident. Being 
a green country boy, I was so embarrassed 
I could hardly acknowledge that I was the 
lynx carrier. As a country boy, I did not 
understand how to play with the local school 
children as I had no experience in friends 
outside of the actual family as my contacts 
for playmates. I had no real pal for the year 
that we were in Berkeley. 

The second year, the family moved to 
Visalia, California. There, my younger sister 
and myself were sent into grammar school 


with my brother, and my older sister went 
into high school. I was very fortunate to have 
excellent teachers through the two years we 
lived in Visalia. Miss Howell, who was my 
sixth grade teacher, was very understanding 
and very helpful and saw to it that five of the 
class were put into special sessions so that 
we were able to skip the seventh grade in 
its entirety and move from the sixth to the 
eighth grade. 

My eighth grade teacher at Visalia was 
Julia Hansen Of all the teachers that I had in 
my schooling, Julia Hansen made the most 
lasting impression on me as an instructor as 
well as a friend. Julia Hansen’s strong forte 
was absolute correct pronunciation of any 
word, large or small, and she insisted that the 
conversation in the classroom adhere strictly 
to the best English possible for our years in 
school. She organized parties, she organized 
groups, we had mock trials, and many other 
extra-curricular functions in the classroom, 
which certainly left a lasting impression of 
a very dear teacher in my memory forever. 

In the Visalia schools, my best pal was 
John V. Mueller, who subsequently came to 
Reno, Nevada, and was very prominent in 
political circles in the state. John and I were 
inseparable pals in Visalia and were good 
friends when we were at the University of 
Nevada. 

Juvenile delinquency was a word that was 
not in the English language when we were 
students in the Visalia schools. However, 
when Halloween came, there were many 
pranks played on local citizens which were 
a little hard to understand. I remember very 
distinctly that a group of us got ahold of a 
neighbor’s cow and by persuasion, beating, 
and coaxing and cajoling, we managed to get 
this cow from the ground into the belfry of the 
grammar school. I still don’t quite recall how 
we were able to do it. However, I do know it 



6 


Alton E. Glass 


took two days for people to get the cow from 
the belfry down to the ground again. 

Dad’s duties when we were living in 
Berkeley and Visalia involved the sale of the 
R. Kirman holdings in the Visalia area. Mr. 
Kirman owned some 12 sections of land 
from Visalia to the Three Rivers area and 
comprising the Exeter District of Tulare 
County. Dad was instructed to sell this land 
at $10 per acre straight across. Dad developed 
two water wells about 150 deep. He blasted 
the hardpan in the immediate area of these 
wells and planted orange trees. In 1908 Dad 
contacted a Mr. Stevenson from Los Angeles 
who purchased the entire remaining holdings 
which comprised about 10 sections at that 
time. Mr. Stevenson subsequently developed 
several other water wells and developed an 
interurban line from Visalia into what was 
called Woodland near Lemon Cove. Some 
of these lands were subsequently sold before 
1920 for as high as $600 per acre. 

In 1908, after the sale of the remaining 
properties in Visalia, Dad was transferred 
back to Reno, Nevada, and the family moved 
from Visalia to Reno, Nevada, in the summer 
of 1908. I had graduated from grammar 
school and in the fall of 1908, went directly 
into high school with my younger sister, while 
my older sister went to the University, and my 
brother was in grammar school. 



2 

Reno, 1908-1915 


When we moved to Reno in 1908, the city 
had a population of around 7,500 people. Of 
course, gambling was wide open at that time, 
and the present Palace Club at the corner of 
Center Street and Commercial Row is still 
operating in the same location as it was in 
1908. The other clubs are all practically new 
clubs to the area. The streets were unpaved, 
and the afternoon breezes created some 
serious dust storms. Reno had adequate 
churches, and a fairly good school system with 
Mr. B. D. Billinghurst as City Superintendent 
of Schools. 

Mr. Billinghurst was an excellent educator, 
but as with all superintendents, never had 
sufficient funds to have adequate schools for 
the number of pupils available. In four years 
of high school, we were put in three separate 
locations to try to accommodate the number 
of students in both grammar schools and 
high school. 

I was very fortunate in high school to have 
had excellent instructors in practically all of 
the high school subjects. The high school 
subjects as of 1908 were fairly well set. There 


was no such thing as “electives.” You had a 
certain amount of mathematics, a certain 
amount of history, chemistry, physics, and 
English, and of course, a foreign language. 
Mr. Chase was the principal of the school 
when we went in 1908. Some of our teachers 
were Goodwin Doten, who was the Latin 
teacher; Agnes Bell, who was the foreign 
language teacher, Miss Dillon, who was the 
English teacher; Mr. Board, who was the 
history teacher; Elizabeth Evans Robinson 
was a history teacher; and Mr. Bruner was our 
chemistry teacher. Mr. Chase was eventually 
replaced by Mr. W. A. Ferguson, who was a 
very good administrator in his own right. 

I was never an athlete of any description 
whatsoever. However, I did play on the 
football team of Reno High in 1909 and 
1910. I also took part in some of the track 
and field events for our annual get-togethers 
with the freshmen of the University and the 
high school fortunate enough to have parts 
in the “Merchant of Venice (Up to Date)” 
and “My Lord in Livery.” These plays were 
put on not as money-makers but as simply a 



8 


Alton E. Glass 


matter of developing talent in acting and to 
give the parents of the high school students an 
opportunity to see what was going on. 

The class of 1912 put out an annual 
publication called, the Au Revoir which was 
quite a publication and quite an endeavor for 
that time. It consisted of a paper-bound book 
with the usual class prophecies, histories of the 
class, functions of the various organizations 
within the school. It was a fairly complete 
history of the class from 1908 until 1912. 

There was quite an extensive group to 
get this annual book out. One of our top 
assistants in the completion of the book 
was Mr. Graham Sanford who subsequently 
was the owner of the Reno Evening Gazette . 
Mr. Sanford went out of his way on many 
occasions to help us in obtaining advertising 
and to properly organize the material for the 
completion of the annual book. I am donating 
our book to the University for what it may be 
worth. [See Nevada and the West Collection, 
University of Nevada Library.] 

The local people whom we knew best 
were nearly entirely connected with banking 
enterprises, as Father was with the Farmers’ 
and Merchants’ National Bank of Reno. Mr. 
Richard Kirman and Mr. W. J. Harris were 
the two principal officers of the Farmers’ 
and Merchants’ National Bank. Mr. Bender, 
Mr. Taylor, and Mr. Mapes were the three 
principal officers of the Washoe County Bank. 
Mr. Wingfield and Mr. Kennedy were the 
principal officers of the Reno National Bank 
at that time. 

In 1908 the building where the Reno 
National Bank eventually located was nothing 
but a wood structure. The same condition 
existed at the corner of First and Virginia 
Streets where the present First National 
Bank of Nevada now stands. The structure 
at First and Virginia consisted principally of 
a blacksmith shop and a wagon repair shop. 


The old Overland Hotel is about the only 
hotel structure that was built at that time. All 
of the newer structures are buildings built 
subsequent to 1918. Of course, at that time, 
the old Golden Hotel which was a frame 
structure was built and was one of the main 
hotelries in Reno at that time. 

Reno had electric street cars at that time. 
There was an electric line that ran from the 
center of Rena to Moana. Another line went 
from the center of Reno into what is now the 
Burks Addition. There was another line that 
went up Second Street as far as Keystone, and 
another line which went from the Southern 
Pacific depot, up Center Street to Second, up 
Second to Sierra Street, Sierra Street to Ninth 
Street, and Ninth Street east to the entrance 
to the University. At the northeast corner of 
Sierra and Plaza was the McKissick Opera 
House, which was subsequently changed over 
to a straight hotel premises. The grocery stores 
were strictly family grocery enterprises; there 
was no such thing as supermarkets. There 
was a very friendly spirit among all of the 
merchants who knew their customers, as well 
as the background of each of these customers. 
Dalton, Clifford and Wilson was strictly a 
drug store, yet, it did have a soda fountain, 
which was extremely popular among all of 
the high school students. Gray, Reid, and 
Wright was the only sizeable department 
store in town and at that time, it was not a 
very extensive spread of merchandise. The 
deliveries for the grocery stores and so forth 
were all done by horse-drawn vehicles. Each 
morning, one of the clerks from the grocery 
store would call on his customers and solicit 
their daily orders to be delivered later on in 
the day. 

There were two additional merchants 
in Reno in the 1908 period who deserve 
attention. Sol Levi had a dry goods store at the 
corner of Center and Second Streets and was 





Reno, 1908-1915 


9 


one of the better merchants in the community. 
There was also the dry goods firm of H. Fraley, 
which occupied a store at the center of the 
block between Virginia and Center Streets on 
First Street. There was a third merchant who 
was supposed to be a bicycle repair man and a 
gunsmith. His store was next to the old Cann 
Drug Company on the west side of Virginia 
Street between Second and Commercial Row. 
This shop was the wildest conglomeration of 
merchandise that could possibly be imagined. 
He had stuffed birds, old mining equipment, 
and oddities from all over the world scattered 
all over the shop. The man was an excellent 
gunsmith and therefore maintained his store 
until he passed on. That was Matt Paret. 

Where I recall the names of the bankers 
before-mentioned, Mr. Kirman and Mr. 
Harris were the only two men with whom I 
was well-acquainted. Mr. Taylor, Mr. Bender, 
and Mr. Mapes of the Washoe County Bank 
were all very well respected citizens and 
prominent men in the civic activities of the 
town. Mr. Wingfield’s bank was the largest 
institution in the community and although 
Mr. Wingfield was well-known, I just knew 
him by sight. 

It is my recollection that in 1909, Mr. 
Richard Kirman, Mr. William Dressier, Mr. 
Charles Lewis, and my father purchased 
the Plymouth Land and Stock Company 
in Smith Valley and Bridgeport. From the 
inception of this purchase, my father was 
the bookkeeper for the group and also the 
livestock superintendent for the company. Mr. 
Kirman, as a banker, had very little operation 
with the organization. William Dressier was 
the sheepman for the organization. This 
company had about 10,000 ewes, and about 
6,000 head of cattle. Charlie Lewis was the 
ranch superintendent and also had charge of 
the cattle and sheep drives from Smith Valley 
into the Bridgeport areas. This was quite an 


extensive operation and the place where I 
really learned about ranching and farming. 

In 1912, in the summer, I was an irrigator 
at the Bridgeport ranch. At the end of the end 
of the irrigation season, I assisted in driving 
the cattle from Bridgeport back to the winter 
range at Smith Valley at the headquarters 
ranch. On several occasions, I fed sheep and 
assisted in the lambing of the ewes. There 
were very few operations on this big ranch 
that I did not participate in directly; such 
jobs as milking, blacksmiths helper, raking 
hay, pitching hay into the cocks, and driving 
the derrick rig which built the big hay stacks. 
Back in 1912, it was nothing unusual to see a 
hay stack that had 250 tons of hay beautifully 
stacked. This hay, of course, was the winter 
forage for both the cattle and sheep which 
were held at the main ranch. 

In 1919, the ranch business headquarters 
was above the J. R. Bradley store. I had just 
returned from World War I, being honorable 
discharged, and was sitting in the office when 
Mr. Lewis came into the office and announced 
that he had just purchased a band of sheep. 
Dad asked him, “What did you pay for those 
sheep?” Mr. Lewis said, “17.50 per ewe.” My 
father’s reply was, “That’s fine, but first you 
buy me out of this organization.” Mr. Lewis 
was a very dynamic man and his answer was, 
“I’ll do just that.” That was the beginning of 
the disbanding of the Plymouth Ranch as far 
as Kirman, Lewis, Dressier, and Glass were 
concerned. Father sold his equity first, Mr. 
Kirman followed by selling his equity to Mr. 
Dressier, and finally Mr. Lewis sold his equity 
to Mr. Dressier. William Dressier became 
the sole owner of the Plymouth Ranch from 
then on. 

During the serious depression of 1929 to 
1933, Mr. Dressier was in financial difficulties. 
Norman Brown had married his daughter, 
and he made a deal with Mr. Brown to sell him 



10 


Alton E. Glass 


Plymouth Ranch for whatever amount could 
be borrowed from the Federal Land Bank 
of Berkeley, together with a commissioner 
loan which represented the livestock end of 
the property It is my recollection that the 
best loan that the Federal Land Bank would 
make, including the commissioner’s loan was 
$57,000. And Mr. Dressier closed with Mr. 
Norman Brown for that amount as of 1933. 
If this property were to be appraised for a 
market value as of this date, it would be worth 
a minimum of a three quarters of a million 
dollars on a reasonable market valuation. 

As of 1917, my father was appointed as 
the first accredited appraiser in the state of 
Nevada. His work comprised the appraising 
of farms and ranches and livestock for the 
Federal Land Bank of Berkeley, for the 
Pacific Coast Joint Stock Land Bank of San 
Francisco, and for the California Joint Stock 
Land Bank which was a subsidiary of the 
Bank of America. My father’s work carried 
him all over the entire state of Nevada. 

In 1908, Father purchased a lot at the 
corner of Flint and Liberty Streets for the 
very inflated sum of $ 1,100. He immediately, 
with Mother’s help, designed a six-room 
structure to be constructed on this particular 
lot. When the contract was let in 1908, Self 
and Sellman bid $3,045 for the completed 
structure. The structure consisted of six 
rooms, plus bath, plus quarter basement, 
plus big front porch, plus sizeable rear porch. 
This house on today’s market would cost 
approximately $27,000. 

Our family life after we moved into 
the home at Flint and Liberty was strictly 
academic as all of the four children were in 
school. The older sister was in the University, 
my younger sister and myself were in high 
school and a brother was in grammar school. 
Mother’s social activities were very limited, 
however. She was very active in seeing that 


tour children did their homework religiously 
and kept their grades well above standards 
throughout their entire school period. 

Of course, there was a little social life. My 
two sisters belonged to clubs of different sorts 
and myself and my brother both belonged to 
boys’ clubs in the town. These were not civic 
clubs, but purely private organizations that 
got together with a group of our particular 
friends. My sister’s organization was called 
the “CCC Club,” and try as I might, I was 
never able to determine what this “CCC” 
represented. However, there were some very 
nice parties, and at one of these parties, I 
met my wife for the first time. As far as our 
organization goes, we had a group of some 
twelve boys. At the present time, there are 
only two of the original twelve who are still 
alive. It was purely a social club. Once a year 
we gave a semi-formal dance which was 
our main annual activity. The two boys who 
are still alive are myself and Herbert Tait. 
A third, Ben Wrigley, died in 1966. Some 
of the other boys who have passed on were 
John Dodd, Sidney Fowler, Tom Williams, 
Stanford Coffin. Phi Delta Omega, I think, 
was the name of the organization, but I’m not 
at all sure that that was what it was. 

In 1912, I graduated from Reno High 
School, and in the fall semester entered the 
University of Nevada in the School of Civil 
Engineering. Entrance into the University 
at that time was more a matter of form than 
anything else. In the two and one-half years 
that I was in attendance at the University 
I had two elective subjects. The rest of the 
subjects were assigned for each school in 
which the student was registered. It is my 
recollection that the freshman class consisted 
of 87 hopefuls. It is also my recollection 
that all the schools, all the special students, 
and everyone in attendance at the University 
represented a grand total of 465 people. 



Reno, 1908-1915 


11 


I was never an athlete in any respect. 
However, we had so few students at the 
University that I did get in on some of the 
football and baseball activities. One of my 
vivid memories in the football activities was 
when the Warators, which was a professional 
New Zealand team, visited the United States 
and played the various universities. They had 
wired ahead and stated that the score with 
which they would beat the various universities 
would be directly proportionate to the 
reception they received at the schools. It is 
my recollection that the first university which 
they visited was the University of California, 
who did not even give them the courtesy of 
meeting the boat when these football players 
arrived. The resulting score was 67 to nothing. 
Their next game was with Stanford University 
who showed them a very nice time and it is 
my recollection that the ultimate score was 
fifty-something to 26. The third university 
they played was the University of Nevada. 
We went all out to see that they were properly 
entertained throughout their stay at our 
organization. The ultimate score was 43 to 27. 
But I will have to admit that during the course 
of the game at least three of the 15 men of this 
rugby football squadron were sitting on the 
sidelines enjoying the spectacle. 

One of the two major features which took 
place during my attendance at the University 
was the layout and subsequent construction of 
the big Nevada “N,” which was on the north 
side hills for many years. The other principal 
happening was the dedication if the Mackay 
Stadium at the University. Clarence Mackay 
was in attendance at this dedication. 

The rest of the period was a pretty serious 
grind, as our classes were small and the 
professors saw to it that any member of the 
class received a passing grade at least. 

I was fortunate enough to be a member 
of the Dr. Charles Haseman Glee Club and 


sang in the glee club in 1913 and 1914. This 
glee club made trips to Tonopah, to Elko, 
and to Ely, and suffice to say that we had a 
wonderful time with this group of twelve 
men, and Dr. Haseman as our director. We 
all sang in formal clothes and made quite an 
impression in towns like Tonopah and Ely. Dr. 
Haseman was the professor of mathematics 
at the University, and it was almost an axiom 
that any mathematics students who sang 
in his glee club received a very satisfactory 
passing mark. That was a fact, but it must be 
remembered that on the tours which we took 
about the state in our singing engagements, 
instead of one hour class instruction, we had 
from three to five hours instruction. And 
believe me, it was worth it. 

In my qualitative analysis class, which 
was the laboratory course for chemistry, I was 
rather a smart aleck and thought I knew all 
the answers. However, when it came to a final 
examination in this subject, I worked over 
the reagent that was given me, not once, but 
three times, and for the life of me could detect 
absolutely no element showing. My third run 
for this brought me up to the end of the class 
and I finally went up to the professor and told 
him, “I have analyzed this thing completely 
three times, and there is absolutely nothing 
in the way of minerals in this sample.” His 
answer was, “That is exactly right. It’s distilled 
water.” That professor was W. W. Williams. 

Another incident was in Dr. Jones’ class 
in geology. The course was the identification 
of various ores and it was a subject that I had 
great difficulty in becoming interested in. 
Practically all ores looked alike to me. But, I 
can remember on the final examination, Dr. 
Jones gave us a group of minerals to identify, 
and when he passed the tray to me, he said, 
“Now, Mr. Glass, there is no ferros in this 
group.” Ferro seemed to be my stumbling 
block throughout the whole course in geology. 



12 


Alton E. Glass 


Dr. Boardman, who was the Dean of 
the College of Civil Engineering, on the 
completion of our first course in graphic 
statics asked if there would be anyone in the 
group who would be interested in taking an 
advanced course in this subject, as he himself 
was interested in reviewing this particular 
subject. I happened to be the only one who 
was interested in this particular course. The 
work was the analysis of trusses for stresses 
and strains and was something that I was 
vitally interested in. Professor Boardman 
and myself went through this entire course. 
Between us, I think I got more out of this 
particular course because of the direct contact 
with the professor than anything else I had 
in college. However, at the end of the course, 
the good professor handed me as my final 
examination the examination of a 94-member 
Fink truss. To this day I have never forgiven 
him, as it took approximately six weeks to 
complete the analysis for the assignment. He 
gave me a 96 on it. 

As of 1912, there were no college 
fraternities and only one college sorority, the 
Tri-Deltas. Professor Scrugham and Professor 
Charlie Knight were both vitally interested 
in getting some national fraternity into the 
University. In 1912, these two professors got 
together and organized a group of twelve men 
who called themselves the Nevada Club, with 
the ultimate intention of petitioning some 
national fraternity. In 1914, we chose as our 
fraternity the Sigma Nu group, and petitioned 
it. Our petition was allowed in late 1914. The 
fraternity was installed in the spring of 1915. 

Of the twelve men of the Nevada Club 
who originally petitioned for Sigma Nu, 
there were only eight who finally went 
through the initiation ceremonies. Harper 
Neil, who subsequently became the general 
superintendent of the Anaconda Copper 
Company in Montana, was the only senior. 


There was Delwin Dessar and Archie Trabert, 
who were the two juniors in the organization. 
Arch Trabert has passed on, as has Delwin 
Dessar. Albert Jackson, Basil Crowley, 
Wendell Jones, William Wiley and myself 
were the balance of the eight in this group. 
Albert Jackson subsequently was a major 
general in the United States Army, Basil 
Crowley was a physician, Wendell Jones was 
the superintendent of the big copper plant 
at Salt Lake City, and William Wiley was a 
banker in Los Angeles. This is the group that 
was initiated into the fraternity. 

The actual initiation was done by a group 
of six men from the Sigma Nu organization in 
the University of California and six men from 
the organization in the fraternity at Stanford. 
It was practically an all-day initiation and 
quite a hassle. Our first fraternity house was 
the second house on the left as you go out of 
the main entrance of the University. 

In the University there were many 
extracurricular activities, such as the U. of 
N. paper, the mining club, the mechanical 
and civil engineers’ club and the chemistry 
club. These were all small organizations and 
were more social groups than anything else. 
However, each one had an annual dance and 
to top off the entire year’s program, we had the 
Military Ball, which was the ultimate activity 
of the students cadet’s organization. 



3 


Early Employment 


In my junior year at the University, I finally 
decided that it would be easier to go to work 
than to struggle for seven days a week trying 
to become a college graduate. I therefore left 
the University and took a job with the General 
Land Office, which had the assignment of 
re-establishing the section corners and one 
of the supplemental meridians which went 
from Battle Mountain east to Halleck, Nevada. 

This work was a resurvey of works which 
had been contracted by C. C. Tracy in 1864. 
The amazing part of the original survey was 
that in all the section markers we discovered 
which had been set by Mr. Tracy in 1864, 
they were never more than one and one-half 
feet off of line. In running this survey, Mr. 
Tracy had nothing but an open-sight hairline 
compass, and yet he maintained this accuracy 
in his direction and in the actual chaining 
of the distance from one section corner to 
another. The marking of the section corners 
by Mr. Tracy was a 2-inch willow stake which 
was squared off on the four sides and Roman 
numerals indicating the sections represented 
carved into the wood. We found many of 


these section corners in almost perfect 
preservation. 

When our crew got into the Elko area, I 
happened to be transit man on one of the days. 
In plunging my transit and backsighting, I 
found that a corner fencepost was exactly on 
line with the location for the section corner. 
We carefully measured the distance and the 
actual distance came exactly on this fencepost. 
There was a man walking up and down the 
fence with a shotgun on his arm. I went over 
to him and told him that we were Government 
surveyors, it was our job to set a section post 
wherever the survey showed that section post 
should be, and that in this particular instance, 
his corner fencepost was directly at the spot 
where the section corner must be set. His 
answer was, “Well, that’s fine, I’ll help you in 
setting the post.” And, just by passing the time 
of day, I asked him how the rabbit hunting 
was. His reply was, “Rabbit hunting, hell! This 
shotgun was for a surveyor who did not find 
the section corner at my fencepost.” 

Another interesting experience on this 
was a little farther on. Running the section 



14 


Alton E. Glass 


line, it was necessary for us to take a solar 
observation to make absolutely certain that 
we were on the correct line for the section 
line. This is done by an attachment to the side 
of the transit. The transit was set for a certain 
declination and at a certain given moment, 
which was timed by a chronometer, a reading 
was taken. This, in turn, determined the 
correctness of the line where we were running 
the section boundary. 

We made our transit setup and were just 
waiting for the exact timing to make our 
reading when someone came from the east 
down the highway. He would have driven his 
team of horses directly over the transit had 
we not stopped him. He was so wrathy that 
he almost screamed at us. We tried to appease 
him by telling him that we were Government 
surveyors, that it was absolutely necessary to 
take this reading, and it would not be over a 
5-minute delay. But he was still screaming 
after we had made our setting and had moved 
the transit so that he could pass on. 

This General Land Office crew was 
disbanded on the 18th of December, at the 
first tunnel east of Elko, with a thermometer 
reading of -37° the morning we broke camp. 
Our chief of party decided that that was just a 
little bit too cold to follow through any farther 
on this survey. 

From the General Land Office, I went 
to Martinez, California, where the Shell 
Oil Company was just perfecting their big 
petroleum plant. I started out with this 
organization as tail house man. The job 
entailed taking the specific gravity of the 
various oil products which came from the 
continuous distillation of the stills. This 
process, known as the Trumbull process, at 
that time was the only continuous distillation 
operation in the world. It has subsequently 
developed into a very complicated system. The 
oil recoveries have gone from approximately 


60 percent of available gasoline up to as high 
as 94 percent available gasoline under their 
present modern methods. 

The still could handle approximately 
10,000 barrels of oil per day. It was a new 
departure from the old-time destructive 
distillation in gasoline and engine distillate 
and kerosene recovery. There were many flaws 
in the operation, which at times would require 
closing down of the entire operation. This was 
about a two-day process to properly cool the 
still and get it down to a position where the 
workmen could replace bad tubing or bad 
retorts on the actual fireboxes of the process. 

The oil was heated up to as high as 1,400° 
to 1,600°, and exhausted into a tower which 
was approximately six feet in diameter and 
eighty feet tall. Within this tower, the volatile 
gases came in at the head. As the lighter 
fraction of the oils were taken off under 
umbrellas which were set within this six foot 
tower, the heavier fractions of distillation sank 
to the bottom of this tower. The bottom, of 
course, was the remaining residuum of the 
oils. This residuum, as it came from the still, 
was transferred to heat exchangers which 
gave a primary heat to the oil as it went into 
the still. 

The process of separating the various 
fractions that came from this tower was done 
by super-heated steel. This super-heated steel 
was heated to 800° so that it was completely 
dry and there could be no oil explosions due 
to water content within the fractions. 

There was one very interesting occurrence 
which happened when they were completing 
the setup for Trumbull Number Two. The 
tower on this Number Two was a tower 90 
feet long and 8 feet in diameter, and probably 
weighed in the neighborhood of 35 to 40 tons 
complete. This tower had to be lifted upright 
and raised into the air some 25 feet to be set 
on big steel posts. 



Early Employment 


15 


The engineering department of the Shell 
Oil Company, very few of whom spoke 
English, were standing around jabbering and 
chattering as to howto do this. We had an old- 
time rigger and his crew who were supposed 
to do the job. He finally was tired of listening 
to the engineers’ chatter and went over to the 
superintendent and told him, “If you’ll just get 
these dudes out of here, I’ll put that darn thing 
wherever you want it, and do it right now.” 
The superintendent looked at him (he was a 
man who would weigh around 260 pounds) 
and decided maybe he’d better let the rigger 
go ahead with it. 

So the rigger got his crew together, put his 
various pulleys and so forth in place and when 
he was all set, gave the signal to raise. Up went 
the 90-foot tube and never stopped until it was 
in position and bolted to the big steel girders 
which held it in place. I never will forget that. 
Here’s about eight or ten engineers chattering 
and jabbering and figuring and with the slide 
rules and what-have-you. And here’s this guy 
standing over here with his hands on his hips 
looking at them. And when that thing started, 
it went up just like that, they pushed it over, 
and set it in there and bolted it in place; and 
that’s all there was to it. 

The chief engineer was directly from 
Holland. His assistant was from Baku fields on 
the Caspian Sea and the other two engineers 
were men who had both come directly from 
the Egyptian fields. Few of them spoke more 
than “yes” or “no” in English. 

The chief engineer, the chief chemist, 
the general superintendent and the general 
manager all spoke English fairly well, but 
not to fluently. They’d get a little confused 
themselves every once in a while! 

The Chief Chemist at the Shell Company 
was a man with many academic titles behind 
his name. He was a big, jolly Dutchman who 
dearly loved American slang. He spoke, read, 


and wrote five different languages, English 
probably being the language which he knew 
least. However, for any oddity that would 
come up in a conversation he must have a 
definite explanation of exactly what the word 
meant and where it could be applied. He used 
to give a lecture twice a month to some of 
the men in the top positions of the operating 
staff. And his English was certainly a delight 
to listen to. 

In May of 1917, I enlisted in the Field 
Artillery at San Francisco and was immediately 
transferred to the Hawaiian Islands. I was 
assigned to Battery E of the Ninth Field 
Artillery at Schofield Barracks, some 20 miles 
from Honolulu. The regiment stayed on at 
Schofield Barracks until the last of December 
when the entire outfit was transferred to Fort 
Sill, Oklahoma. 

At Fort Sill, Battery E of the Ninth Field 
Artillery was chosen as the demonstrating 
squad for the school of sire at the big artillery 
school at this location. My gun squad was the 
demonstrating squad for special firing for 
these artillery problems. In April of 1918, 1 
was transferred from Fort Sill to Leon Springs, 
Texas, as an instructor in the officers’ training 
camp at that location. I was there for four 
months and then transferred back to Fort Sill, 
where almost immediately I was transferred 
to Camp Zachary Taylor just outside of 
Louisville as an officer candidate at the big 
officers’ school at this location. 

I recall very vividly in our first class, 
some officer was demonstrating how to take a 
3-inch field piece apart. He started to take off 
the main locking nut from the piston which 
actuates the recoil of the gun. This, of course, 
is absolutely against all regulations, and had 
he taken this bolt off, the gun would have been 
scattered all over the whole territory. I stood 
it for about four turns on the nut and then 
sounded off as to what would happen if he 



16 


Alton E. Glass 


removed this particular nut. His answer was, 
“I suppose you know how to do this;” and my 
reply was, “Yes, Sir, I’ve done it many, many 
times.” “All right!” he says, “Take charge of the 
class.” And from there on I was an instructor, 
rather than a student in the officers’ training 
school. 

During the course of demonstrating 
squad work at Fort Sill, accidents in the firing 
conduct were bound to occur, whether it was 
the fault of the gun or the ammunition that 
was used is hard to tell. However, there was 
one accident in which the field piece blew 
up killing four of the seven men on the gun 
squad, singeing all the hair off my head and 
eyebrows and completely deafening me from 
the concussion. I was very fortunate that the 
hearing returned to my right ear in about two 
weeks’ time. However, the left eardrum was 
so badly split, I never recovered more than 10 
percent of the hearing in that ear. However, I 
did manage to get through the balance of my 
enlistment in the Army without a medical 
discharge. 

On my discharge from the Army in 
December, 1918, I immediately returned to 
Martinez and the Shell Oil to pick up where 
I had left off. However, I found that my job 
had been usurped by someone else and the 
only thing that the company had to offer 
me was the fireman’s job on the stills, which 
was about 10 positions below my former 
job. I immediately decided that I could get 
along very nicely without the Shell Oil, and 
therefore quit them on the spot. 

As I was in Martinez and there was an 
opening in the County Surveyor’s Office of 
Contra Costa County, I took a job as one of a 
surveyor’s crew which was putting the county 
highway through from Antioch to Concord. 
At this period they did not have big earth- 
moving machinery and the entire roadbed 
was graded with slip and Fresno scrapers with 


mules and horses. It is amazing how much 
dirt these crews could move in one day and 
how well-placed and well-compacted this 
material was. This job only lasted for about 
four months. As I was still badly upset over 
the way the Shell Oil had treated me, I decided 
to get out of the country. 

My brother was located in Tonopah and 
kept writing me to come to Tonopah, as there 
was plenty of work in that part of the country. 
I therefore went to Tonopah, and immediately 
got a job on the ten-hundred-foot level of the 
Belmont Mines as operator for the electric 
tram which hauled the ore from the interior 
stopes to the main shaft. This job lasted for 
about three months. 

I then took a job at the old Miller cyanide 
plant as solution man. This job was a man- 
killer. It was 80 feet from the floor of the mill 
to the classifiers. Then the round-trip route 
from the classifiers through the slime and 
settling tanks, and back to the classifiers, 
was at least a quarter of a mile in length. The 
first job in the morning was to clear out the 
ball mills and reset new pegs so that the balls 
within the mill would be juggled around and 
crush the ore into powder fineness. 

In Tonopah, we had what was called the 
Montana Club where a group of twelve of us 
roomed and boarded in one of the old mine 
bunk-houses. The old cook was a camp cook. 
However, she was an artist at preparing meat 
and vegetables; and therefore, our living was 
very high as far as the food was concerned. 
Of the group in this boarding house, there 
were three mining engineers, two assayers, 
two shift bosses, and several roustabouts like 
myself. It was a very congenial crowd, and we 
had excellent living conditions for the period 
that I was in Tonopah. 

I did not have an opportunity to meet 
any of the downtown people, but there was 
an atmosphere about the whole community 



Early Employment 


17 


which is hard to explain and impossible 
to duplicate. There is a friendliness and a 
wholesomeness about a mining community, 
especially when it is on the decline, that is 
simply wonderful as far as friendship and ease 
in being acquainted and knowing each other 
goes; a wonderful atmosphere in which to 
work. However, I decided that as a miner I was 
a failure and that I would go on to the Texas oil 
fields and try my luck again at refinery work. 

I went directly to Dallas and Fort Worth 
at first. At that time, there were no big 
oil companies at this location so I moved 
on down to Beaumont, which was the 
headquarters of the Magnolia Petroleum 
Company of Texas. Beaumont is located 
some five miles inland from Port Arthur and 
is on the Natches River. 

When I first went to the company’s plant, 
as I was looking at the bulletin board, the 
personnel officer came out and pinned a 
notice on the bulletin board indicating a man 
with some college education in engineering 
was needed in the engineering department. 
As he pinned the notice on the board, I 
reached up and picked it off and told him, 
“I am your man.” He took me inside and 
introduced me to the general superintendent 
who talked to me for about five minutes and 
told me to report to work the next day. 

The Chief Engineer of the Magnolia 
Petroleum Company was a grand chap 
named W. W. Swope. There were twelve men 
in the department—the chief engineer, his 
two assistants, two field men, and the balance 
of us draftsmen or engineers of some sort. 

The job that was assigned me was in 
the test engineering department, which 
would require the testing of all the steam 
plants, the testing of the various pumps, the 
testing of the freezing plant unit, and the 
testing for efficiency in the various smoke 
stacks throughout this big spread. They 


assigned me a helper, who was a Ph. D. as 
well as a doctor of science and a doctor of 
engineering. The man was a grand chap and 
could calculate in his head faster than I could 
on a calculating machine. However, he was 
the most impractical individual I have ever 
worked with in my life. He just simply had 
no control of his hands, but his magnificent 
mind and capacity at calculation saved me 
many, many hours of work. He was John 
Brookshire. 

An amusing thing happened at the start 
of my work, was assigned the job of putting 
a supplemental steam line from the main 
steam plant to one of the auxiliary buildings 
and to hook it up to a particular type of 
engine. I asked the engineer, who would I 
get for a gang to make the excavation and 
put in the line? He told me that the next 
morning he would have the gang ready for 
me at eight o’clock. 

I reported to the site at eight o’clock and 
here was a crew of some forty Negroes to 
dig a trench about 200 feet long. As I had 
never worked in the South, I didn’t quite 
understand what it was all about, but fearing 
to show my ignorance, I asked who was the 
head of the gang and a big burly Negro spoke 
up, “I is, sir.” And, I said, “O.K., we want a 
ditch two feet deep from here to here.” “You 
shall have it.” 

He strung his crew out along this line and 
started to tap on a shovel handle. It seems 
that the only way that these Negroes knew 
how to work was by a cadence. Believe me, 
the dirt flew and the picks flew from then on. 
And in no time at all, we had a good ditch 
from the start to the finished area necessary 
for the steam line. 

We then selected five men and in no time 
at all, under the same cadence, in went the 
pipe. And a job that I figured would probably 
be a day’s work was done in less than two 



18 


Alton E. Glass 


hours’ time. That was my introduction to the 
way they did things down South. 

From there on, there were many different 
types of work assigned to me. I recall one 
instance specifically when we got a call from 
the pumping station which was located 
on the Natches River that they were losing 
suction on the main pumps and could 
not figure out exactly what it was’. The 
pumping plant was about a mile from the 
engineering department and, of course, the 
whole engineering department moved down 
to the area immediately to see what this was all 
about. It seems that there was a school of eels 
coming up the Natches River. As they got near 
the suction areas for the main pumps, these 
eels were so thick that they were covering 
up the orifices in the strainers which went 
to the pumps. We had lost at least one-half 
of the 8,000,000 gallons per day which was 
necessary to supply the stills. We got some 
extra screens, and by changing screens every 
15 minutes we managed to hold the suction 
for these pumps. But it was certainly a battle 
for nearly an hour and a half, and cured me 
from ever wanting to handle an eel again. 

The Magnolia Petroleum Company, 
as of 1920, had a plant which represented 
$80,000,000 in investments. They were 
operating on two kinds of oil—one an 
asphalt base, and the other a paraffin base 
oil. Both of these bases of oil will produce 
lubricants; however, the best oils come 
from the paraffin base oils. And, where the 
oil from the asphalt base oils was recovered 
by destructive distillation, the oil from the 
paraffin base was recovered by freezing the 
paraffin out of the base oil, leaving a thick 
block of paraffin and the oil which was 
recovered. 

One of the particular jobs at the plant 
was the recovery of gasoline distillate and 


kerosene, on what they called the pressure 
stills. This was the forerunner of the present 
high octane recoveries for gasoline. These 
stills were in banks of ten and there were 
100 in the group. The actual stills were 
tanks which held 10,000 gallons of oil which 
were fired. As the temperature and pressure 
developed, the stills were held to 150 pounds 
of pressure, and only the top fractions from 
the stills were allowed to be condensed and 
recovered. This process went on until the 
10,000 barrels of oil had been completely 
exhausted within the still. 

Then the fires were eliminated, the 
manhole taken off of the front of the still, 
and a steam jet inserted into this still until 
the temperature went down to 150°. Then 
a crew of Negroes dressed in asphalt coats 
and trousers, asphalt helmets and wet towels 
over their heads, crawled into the stills and 
immediately began to chip the carbon from 
the surface of the 10,000-barrel steel stills. 
It was estimated that these carbon chippers 
would last about three years, as their lungs 
would burn out in that period of time. 
However, that was the way it was done under 
those circumstances, and the men were 
highly paid for this particular job. 

There were many oddities that came up 
in the distillation process on these various 
stills, especially from the distillation of 
the asphalt base oils. These asphalt base 
oils, when the last lubricating oil had been 
extracted, were then subjected to immediate 
high temperatures and the resulting product 
was coke, which was the last product in the 
asphalt base oils to be recovered. 

I found the entire gang at the Magnolia 
Petroleum Company wonderful people to 
work for and wonderful people to associate 
with. The chief chemist was a young chap who 
was very devoted to his work and was doing a 
wonderful job on this particular organization. 



Early Employment 


19 


The organization had a recreation hall just 
outside of the main gate of the plant and at 
lunch time, most of the department heads and 
all of the engineering department as well as 
the office staff of the group would congregate 
in this recreational hall. We would all eat 
lunch together, probably have some dancing, 
and, on occasion, some talks by some one of 
the department heads of the organization. It 
made for a wonderful spirit throughout the 
entire organization. 

The plant was located about three miles 
from the center of Beaumont, Texas, and was 
reached by an interurban electric line which 
went from the center of Beaumont to the 
gate of the Magnolia Petroleum Company. 
Through the general superintendent, I got a 
room at the YMCA Hotel which was a six- 
story YMCA Hotel complex in the center 
of Beaumont, Texas. There was a wonderful 
group of men living in this building. We had a 
group of some dozen men: men from the Bell 
Telephone Company, two school teachers, 
the head of the Department of Water Works 
in Beaumont, the chief chemist for the Water 
Works of Beaumont, three salesmen, two 
of the foremen from Magnolia Petroleum 
Company, and two young attorneys who were 
just starting off their profession—a fine group 
of high-class boys and except for the climate, 
a wonderful place in which to live. 

One of my friends was Harold Anderson, 
who was a school teacher. Mr. Anderson 
and myself still exchange Christmas cards 
every year. He was a University of Michigan 
educated man and a grand chap to pal around 
with. Another one of the boys was C. D. 
Jones, who was a good old flannel-mouthed 
Southern boy; a graduate from the Georgia 
Tech and the staunchest Democrat it has ever 
been my privilege to know. At least once a 
week, he would back me into a corner and 
give me 15-minute lectures on how stupid 


a man could be who would not disown the 
Republican Party. Some of the cussings that 
he gave me were nothing short of miracles! 
Another one of my very good friends was 
Mr. Burnhagen. We all called him “Doc” as 
he was the chief chemist for the Beaumont 
Water Works. The Beaumont Water Works 
pumped the domestic water into a treating 
plant directly from the Natches River, which 
was a fine mudhole in the wintertime and a 
stagnant pond in the summertime. However, 
the water was properly treated and was 
excellent domestic water at all times due to 
the proper care given it. 

One of the interesting incidents which 
happened while I was there was I was sitting in 
the lobby of the hotel when there was a terrible 
scurry for the basement by everybody within 
the structure. I asked what was going on, and 
they said a Texas twister was headed in this 
direction. Never having seen a Texas twister, I 
decided, well, the only place to view it would 
be from the outside. So, I marched out and I 
believe that I was the only man on the main 
street of Beaumont at that time. However, 
the first puff of wind from this twister soon 
taught me that the only place to be when a 
Texas twister is headed in your direction is 
down in a hole or in a basement. The first 
puff wrapped me around a telephone post, or 
I would have been clear over in the state of 
Louisiana. This particular twister, after it had 
passed through the town, left a swath about 
200 feet wide absolutely barren of anything 
in the way of a structure and also pulled the 
railroad track from its roadbed and moved it 
some 15 feet in the direction of the wind. It is 
unbelievable, the power that those winds can 
generate. I remember very distinctly of one 
brick building on the outskirts of the pathway 
of this wind where a piece of galvanized iron 
was driven into a brick wall almost one toot 
deep. The wind was not over five minutes in 



20 


Alton E. Glass 


duration, but the destruction in its path was 
absolutely complete. 

The climate in southeast Texas proved just 
too much for me. The heat and humidity of 
the summertime, plus the chill of the winters 
soon had me down to a shadow of my former 
self, and in September of 1923, I decided to 
move on. 

I therefore took the train back to Reno. It 
took me some time to get on my feet again. 
However, as soon as I smelled sagebrush and 
could get away from the intense humidity of 
the Texas country, I revived very rapidly. I 
went to work in my father s office. 



4 


Beginnings of the 
First National Bank 


When I arrived back in Reno in 1923, 
Dad was still the appraiser for the Joint Stock 
Land Banks and the Federal Land Bank of 
Berkeley. He had an insurance business, 
and had the management of the building for 
the First National Bank of Reno, which was 
then located at First and Virginia Streets. As 
Father’s work required him to be in the field 
a great deal, I practically took over his office 
operation. 

In 1925, Dad passed away on one of his 
trips to Susanville, and I was immediately 
appointed as his successor for the Joint Stock 
Land Banks. They tried their best to get me 
to take over the duties of the Federal Land 
Bank. However, I was more interested in the 
insurance business and the management of 
the building that I was in the Federal Land 
Bank; and therefore declined to take over the 
assignment. 

However, I did continue with the Joint 
Stock Land Banks’ operation in the State of 
Nevada. They had loaned money to farmers 
all over the country, and my work required 
me to pretty well cover the state to service all 


of their various loans. This work went fairly 
uniformly until the big depression. There 
were a number of interesting occurrences in 
connection with the job, however. 

In the 1933 period, we were finishing 
up with about a four-year drought in the 
range areas of the state. The livestock men 
were simply desperate, because there was 
no market for their cattle. The cattle were 
starving to death on the range, and there 
was no operational money for any of these 
livestock men. There was a commission 
appointed by the United States Government 
to make a survey of this district and to round 
up the livestock and ship them to selected 
areas in Colorado and California, to carry 
them through the winter of’33 and ’34. 

I happened to be in the area at the time 
that this commission was supposed to be 
functioning in the Ely area. I knew the County 
Agent very well, and he asked me to ride with 
him so that I could see first-hand exactly 
what the condition of the livestock in the 
immediate area was like. In all my livestock 
experience, I have never seen anything more 



22 


Alton E. Glass 


pitiful than the condition of the cows that I 
saw staggering from lack of forage and from 
lack of water. In several instances, I have seen 
cows stagger up to a water hole with slobbers 
two feet long hanging from their lips, take 
three or four swallows of water and drop dead 
from the shock as the water hit their stomachs. 

I asked the County Agent, “For heavens 
sake, what is the commission doing to 
alleviate that?” His answer was, “They are 
playing poker at the Northern Hotel in Ely.” 
On my way. back, as I came to the hotel, I 
looked into the card room. Sure enough, there 
were the five men who were supposed to be 
rounding up livestock and shipping them to 
the areas designated, playing poker. I knew 
three of the men very well, and I stopped the 
poker game, with the remark, “Just what are 
you fellows going to do about this livestock 
condition?” Their answer was, “We will get to 
it later.” My answer was, “There are animals 
dying every minute on the range, and it’s 
about time somebody did something. Either 
you fellows do it, or the County Agent and 
myself will do something.” Their answer was, 
“You have no authority,” and they continued 
with their poker game. 

The County Agent and myself in four hours 
time had a fleet of trucks coming in from Salt 
Lake City to handle the transportation. We 
had hired some 25 men to ride the immediate 
range and bring in what livestock they could 
and ship to various points to save the animals 
we possible could save. I do not know what the 
ultimate count in these animals was. However, 
I do know that before I left the country we 
had shipped 10 truckloads of animals, part 
to California and part to Colorado. 

There was quite a controversy over the 
County Agent and myself usurping the 
authority of the commission which was 
supposed to be doing the job. However, 
there were so many of the local operators 


who had seen these men playing poker while 
the livestock was dying on the range, that 
the Government ultimately authorized the 
entire expense of the operation which we 
had started. The County Agent was a fellow 
by the name of “Mud” Townsend. He was a 
grand old boy. 

One of the men of the commission used to 
be an appraiser for the Reno National Bank, 
and he was a louse, if there ever was one. Then 
there was a fellow by the name of Ramsey, 
and some man out of the San Francisco Loan 
Production Credit Corporation was one of 
these dudes. I don’t think that son-of-a-gun 
ever rode a cowhorse in his life out here. And 

there those_sat and played poker while 

the animals died on the range. 

I think there was one of the boys who 
claimed that he had lost 88 percent of his 
herd in that drought. Of course, it was his 
fault to begin with that he didn’t get them 
out of the range before the drought had gone 
too far. However, it just shows what these 
commissions can do if they don’t do the right 
thing. 

In 1933, the national bank moratorium 
was declared, and the Joint Stock Land Banks 
were ordered to liquidate. I made one last 
tour for the Joint Stock Land Banks, after 
notifying them that it would be necessary for 
me to drop their work entirely and confine 
myself completely to the First National Bank 
in their work. 

As of 1933, the First National Bank was a 
bank of some $4,000,000 in deposits, and 17 
employees with R. Kirman, Sr. as president 
of the bank: Walter J. Harris, vice-President 
and manager of the bank: Albert Caton, Sr. 
as cashier of the bank: and Stanley Reese as 
assistant vice-president of the bank. That was 
the officers’ group for the entire organization. 

When the moratorium was declared for 
the national banks, the president of the bank 




Beginnings of the First National Bank 


23 


called the group together and asked each one 
of us individually whether the First National 
Bank of Reno should obey the edict of the 
national bank organization. It was decided 
among the group that inasmuch as it was 
an order from the Federal Reserve and the 
National Bank that a moratorium should be 
declared in all fairness. 

The bank was therefore closed for a 
period of some twelve days, in which time 
we could not furnish any banking facilities 
other than to permit the merchants to 
bring their money in at the end of the day 
to be deposited in safe-deposit boxes for 
their convenience alone. This condition 
went on for some twelve days until the 
bank was permitted to reopen and give 
banking facilities to the public. However, the 
withdrawals from the bank were limited to 
10 percent of their deposits in the bank at the 
time the moratorium was declared. 

I was on the floor at the time with gun 
and a deputy sheriff’s badge to keep order 
should the crowd become too excited. 
However, in the entire period, which was 
about one week in duration, there was only 
one unruly man in the various lines to the 
windows where the withdrawals were being 
made. 

This gentleman was not very difficult 
to control. He was a man who was shoving 
and pushing, talking loud and stamping and 
making a complete nuisance of himself. I 
took the gentleman by arm and marched him 
out to the end of the line which was forming 
for the windows and told him, “Stay in line 
and don’t push, or I will personally stamp 
you into the sidewalk!” From then on we had 
no difficulty with the gentleman whatsoever. 

On the first day of withdrawals, the 
“outs” over the “ins” was some $27,000. On 
the second day, the “outs” over the “ins” was 
$3,200. On the third day the “outs” over the 


“ins” was $400 and from there on, it went in 
the other direction. 

The twelve days during which we sat 
around the bank we enjoyed very much. 
There was absolutely nothing to do but sit 
there; however, it was our job to be on the 
job. 

The day before the moratorium was 
lifted, we got a shipment of silver from the 
Federal Reserve in San Francisco. Of course, 
all this money was loose in canvas sacks 
and it was necessary on the last day of the 
moratorium for the entire group to put this 
money into coin wrappers and be ready for 
the opening day. My particular part of the 
job was to count some $3,000 in quarters. 
That nightmare is still with me. However, the 
group in the bank were all congenial people 
and in spite of the tedious task of getting the 
coins in shape for the opening, we really had 
a very good time. 

In 1934, the officers of the old First 
National Bank of Reno could see that 
individual banks as such would have to 
expand into branch banks, and none of the 
officers of the organization were interested 
in this sort of a change. 

For some period before 1934, there had 
been some negotiations going on between 
Mr. Harris and Mr. Kirman and the Bank of 
America, as they were anxious to get into this 
territory. The field was wide open, for there 
were only four banks available in the entire 
state at that period. 

In 1934, the sale of the First National Bank 
was consummated to the Trans-America 
organization and the only change in the 
personnel was the new president who was sent 
up from San Francisco, a Mr. Carl Wente; a 
wonderful banker, a fine gentleman, and an 
excellent administrator. There was absolutely 
no change in the personnel of the bank group 
until 1935, when the First National of Nevada 



24 


Alton E. Glass 


purchased the old Reno National Bank and 
immediately established the first branch of 
the new organization. From there on, in the 
next few years, there were many banks added 
to the chain. 

The first was the bank in Carson, which 
was reopened to give service to the state 
offices, which was terribly needed. I believe 
the next bank to be organized was the bank at 
Elko, which had had no banking facilities for 
nearly four years, and it was very difficult for 
the farmers and stockmen to operate under 
these conditions. They had to go either to 
Sacramento or to Utah. The next bank to be 
opened and organized under the new setup 
was the bank at Las Vegas. And from there on, 
the expansion of the branches was so rapid 
that it was hard to keep track of them. 

The new president of the bank sent me 
to Tonopah to get the old Tonopah bank, 
which had been closed for many, many years, 
in shape for the opening of a branch in that 
location. The Tonopah people had been 
without banking facilities for nearly four 
years, and it was getting to the point where 
it was simply impossible for them to operate 
under their present conditions any longer. 

When I arrived in Tonopah, I made a 
survey of the bank premises. It was a mess. 
There had been absolutely nothing done in 
the bank for nearly twelve years. The floors 
were in bad shape, the walls were so black that 
you could not tell the color of the paint, and 
everything about the place was dilapidated 
with the exception of the two vault doors. 
I rushed around trying to get carpenters, 
painters, plumbers and electricians as I only 
had three days to get the building in shape. 
By noontime, I could not find one single 
mechanic available to help me. 

I went to Mr. Allan Rives, who was the top 
merchant in Tonopah at that time, and I put 
it to him very bluntly. If he wanted a bank, he 


would have to get me some mechanics. I told 
him that I had been scouting around the town 
to get mechanics and I could find absolutely 
no one. His answer was, “You be at the bank 
at one o’clock and I’ll have mechanics for you.” 
Sure enough, Mr. Rives phoned to Round 
Mountain and told them the predicament that 
we were in, and the Round Mountain Mining 
Company immediately sent two plumbers, 
two electricians and three carpenters who 
arrived at one o’clock promptly. 

We got busy and tore the old place 
apart and slowly put it back together again. 
However, at three o’clock the morning of the 
third day, the painter and myself finished the 
paint on the front door. That’s how close we 
came to the deadline. 

At six o’clock that morning, I went to the 
Tonopah and Goldfield Railroad depot to get 
the shipment of coins for the opening of the 
organization. The baggage men on the train 
had not handled money for so long a period 
that they simply dumped the coin sacks into 
a corner of the baggage car, and let them 
he until they reached Tonopah. Of course, 
practically every coin wrapper was burst, and 
the sacks were full of loose money. 

I called the hotel where three of the boys 
from the bank were staying and told them of 
my predicament. I told them, “For heaven’s 
sake, get over here and let’s get enough money 
wrapped up to start this thing going.” So, 
from six o’clock until 9:30 we had piles of 
silver on the floor of the bank, pawing at it 
and rewrapping it for the reopening of the 
organization. At eight o’clock that morning, 
Mr. Harris and Mr. Wente came into the bank 
to see that everything was in shipshape. Mr. 
Wente took one look, off went his hat and coat, 
down on the floor he got with the rest of us 
and helped us wrap the coins for the opening. 

The bank opened at 10 o’clock promptly, 
after everyone was notified that “fresh paint 



Beginnings of the First National Bank 


25 


is throughout the bank; do not rub against 
any of the walls.” However, when the door 
opened, they came through that door like a 
bunch of sheep. I was not supposed to be on 
the opening of the organization, but I could 
see that two windows were not sufficient to 
service the public for their deposits,” I opened 
a window and started to help out on this. I had 
told Mr. Wente that I did not know anything 
about banking However, I had had enough 
watching tellers and so forth to know what the 
routine was, so I got busy with John Public. 

About a half-hour later, I stepped back 
to get some coins or something and stepped 
on Mr. Wente’s foot as he stood behind me 
watching me in my work at the bank. He said, 
“I thought you didn’t know anything about 
banking.” I said, “I don’t. Somebody had to 
help out, so here we go.” 

I staved with the window until noontime 
and told Mr. Wente I simply had to get back 
to Reno because my work in Reno was piling 
up and I would be so tar behind I never would 
get caught up. He excused me, and he himself 
took over the window when I abandoned it. 

As these new branches were opened up, 
it required a great deal of new personnel and 
we simply did not nave anyone trained in the 
old organization to take over these new jobs. 
Therefore, there were many transfers from 
the Bank of America to the First National to 
fill in wherever necessary in such banks as 
Las Vegas, Elko, Winnemucca, Carson City, 
and so forth. In the meantime, new branches 
were being installed in Yerington and Fallon, 
and the new organization had acquired 
the Minden Bank which was immediately 
converted into a branch bank with Mr. W. 
W. Wennhold as manager of the branch. 
Subsequently, branches were organized at 
Wells and Winnemucca, and later on the First 
National Bank of Lovelock was acquired and 
converted into a branch bank. From there on 


the expansion of the banks was mostly within 
the confines of Las Vegas and Reno. 

When I retired in 1959, there were 18 
banks in the chain. At the present time, 
1965, there are 30 operating branches in the 
organization, and I believe that the expansion 
has not reached its maximum as yet. I am sure 
that there will be other facilities organized as 
the need is shown. 

Such a department as the Trust 
Department was an entirely new organization 
in our bank, and therefore required brand 
new personnel from the top of the department 
to the clerks within the organization. This 
department, plus the necessity for a head 
office department required the expansion of a 
head office to control the entire organization. 
And as the additional banks were added 
to the organization, it required more and 
more personnel to keep the bank properly 
functioning. These men had to be imported 
from the various areas. All men who were sent 
to the First National Bank were men of many 
years experience and many years as operating 
managers for various banks in Oregon, 
Washington, California, and Arizona. These 
men were very carefully screened before they 
were sent to Reno, and to a man, proved to be 
fine chaps to work with and excellent men for 
their various assignments. 

After the closing of the banks which went 
under during the depression, there were 
many capable boys who had been working 
for the Reno National Bank and its affiliated 
branches. Many of these men were taken into 
the First National Bank of Nevada in various 
departments, not only as clerks but as junior 
officers. In some cases, two of the boys were 
made managers of branch banks. These men 
have all proved themselves to be excellent 
operators. At the present date, the president of 
the bank was one of the clerks who came from 
the Reno National Bank to our organization. 




5 


My Work as Appraiser 


In 1934, Mr. Carl Wente, who was the 
new President of the First National Bank, 
appointed me as appraiser for the existing 
branches and for all future development 
throughout the state. At the start we had 
rust the one branch. But the development 
of the branches came so rapidly that the job 
ultimately kept me on the go all the time. 

The appraiser had a peculiar position 
in the bank, inasmuch as his appraiser, 
when completed and submitted to the 
loaning officers, could not be changed in any 
detail. The valuations which he established 
were the valuations on which the loaning 
officers predicated their ultimate credit line 
to the individuals. The responsibility of 
establishing these valuations was a source of 
constant controversy with the loaning officers, 
inasmuch as they were anxious to develop 
their loan portfolio and I was just as anxious 
to see that any loans made over my appraisal 
were in keeping with the actual economic 
value of the property offered for collateral. 
However, Mr. Wente stood behind my every 
appraisal and in a few year’s time we had the 


loaning officers reconciled to my cautious 
valuations. 

The position required me to go to the 
extremes of the state of Nevada. This was 
especially so in the livestock loans, because 
there were certain times when the livestock 
had to be counted, their weights estimated 
and their quality estimated on the range, or 
in transit to the range, and this required the 
appraiser to go to some very isolated areas. 
The sheep which were counted for collateral 
purposes were also badly isolated from any 
highway or good road, and there was many a 
weary mile that I had to hike over the top of 
ridges and through isolated valleys to get to 
a band of sheep to examine it. 

We used to finance many bands of sheep. 
I remember one particular instance which 
happened when I was counting sheep on the 
Silver Mountain. We had to walk in about 
eight miles to get to the sheep, and when we 
got the band into position to count, we had a 
perfect V outlet for the sheep to go through. 
I was leaning up against a tree, taking a slow, 
easy count, when for some reason, one of the 



28 


Alton E. Glass 


goats in the herd broke out of the band and 
came racing by me. He exercised his goat’s 
prerogative and butted me dead center in the 
back. When I got up I thought my back was 
broken, but I still held to the knotted cord 
which I used as a tally for 100 sheep as they 
passed. Looking at the string, I found I had 
counted 1,800 sheep as the goat had hit me. 

Further amusing instances happened 
in this sheep count as well, not the least of 
which was the herders who wanted to present 
their sheep in the best possible light for the 
appraiser to see. If there was a knoll within any 
distance of where the band was located, they 
always put the sheep on the top of the knoll, 
because as you look up at a sheep, it is always 
fat; when you look down on a sheep, the back 
structure will show fat or lean. Therefore, the 
herders will always try to fool you with the 
best appearance of the sheep. Nine times out 
of ten, the owner will overcount his sheep by 
100 to 200 in the band, thinking that someone 
from a bank had never had any experience 
in counting sheep. We were always able to 
reconcile these differences, because it did 
not take the owner long to find out that my 
experience in counting sheep was probably 
far greater than his own. Where we used to 
count between 150 and 200 bands of sheep 
per year, regularly, I very much doubt if there 
are six bands of sheep in the bank portfolio at 
the present time. 

When the Taylor Grazing Act was first 
inaugurated, the primary intent under Mr. 
Carpenter’s program was to conserve the 
grazing areas and to expand them as rapidly 
as possible. This required a very tight control 
on the number of sheep which were allowed 
to graze on designated grass. Under the old. 
regime, there were many tramp sheep herders 
who moved their sheep in continuous drives 
throughout the year from Montana, through 
Wyoming, into Colorado, Texas, New Mexico, 


Arizona, and back through Utah and Nevada, 
through Idaho, and back to the original 
starting spot. These herders never paid taxes; 
they ate up the choice spots in any area where 
they might be, and it made it very difficult for 
the local men who owned ranches and paid 
taxes to operate. The advent of the Taylor 
Grazing Act actually reduced the number of 
sheep which grazed in the state of Nevada by 
better than 70 percent. I very much doubt 
if there are over 300,000 sheep left in the 
state of Nevada. These sheep are operated 
from owned property, and their numbers are 
adjusted to the commensurate rights or food 
units which the home ranch can produce for 
their grazing permits. 

At the inception of this Taylor Grazing 
Act, there was vicious opposition to the 
government control of the areas which 
had been used by the old-time sheepmen 
and livestockmen. However, it was the 
salvation of many of the better grazing 
areas throughout the state, and it has taken 
time to prove this particular fact. I believe 
the Elko range, which I consider one of the 
finest in the state, is in far better condition 
today than it has been for many years. 
As the government continues to exercise 
controls of these areas and continues to 
replant some of the areas that have been 
devastated by overgrazing in the past, we 
will see an excellent advance in the grazing 
conditions for the state of Nevada. That’s a 
pretty bold statement for me to make, but it’s 
fact. To supplement this statement there are 
two areas in the Austin country where the 
government has planted in one area 1,000 
acres of practically denuded grazing area to 
crested wheat, and it is amazing the forage 
that comes off of this particular spot. There 
is another area just north of Austin where 
they have replanted some 2,000 acres to 
crested wheat. After the fourth year, there 



My Work as Appraiser 


29 


was excellent showing of browse which had 
not been in evidence for nearly twelve years. 

The first branch of the bank was established 
on August 1 of 1934. The second branch 
was established in October 28th of 1934. 
The succeeding branches were Carson City, 
Winnemucca, and Tonopah in 1934. In 1935, 
Fallon and Sparks were established. In 1935, 
Elko was taken over and made a branch of 
the organization. In 1937, the first branch was 
established at Third and Fremont Streets in Las 
Vegas. Subsequent to these various dates, the 
branches at Wells, Eureka, Lovelock, Yerington, 
Carson Valley, and the additional branches in 
Reno and Las Vegas were established. From 
this apread it is easy that the job of appraising 
became more and more complicated, until it 
was necessary for me to have a man appointed 
for the cattle loans in Elko and the construction 
loans in Las Vegas. However, it was my job to 
check on all of these appraisals at some time 
during the year. 

As I stated before, the appraiser’s job 
was such a busy one that notable events or 
special happenings in the establishment or 
in the actual appraisals were just routine. 
Before the take-over of the First National 
Bank by the new group, the biggest chattel 
mortgage handed me after I had received 
my appointment as appraiser for the bank 
was for a loan of $65,000, and this amount 
really scared me. However, as the president 
explained, the only difference between $10, 
$ 100, $ 1,000, $ 10,000 or a million dollars was 
a bunch of ciphers, and if you had enough 
livestock to justify the amount requested 
that was all there was to proper appraising. It 
did not take me long to get into this routine 
and at my retirement, a million-dollar chattel 
mortgage did not bother me any more than a 
five thousand-dollar chattel mortgage. 

Under construction loans at the start of 
the take-over, a residence would probably 


have a request of loan not to exceed $7,500, 
while biggest mercantile loan I could find 
in my old appraisals in 1934 was $21,000. It 
did not take long to get these requests into 
a 6-number figure, especially after the take¬ 
over of the branches in Las Vegas. There, my 
first assignment was the Last Frontier Hotel. 
The second assignment was the Thunderbird 
Hotel, and so it went out on “the Strip”. 
All of these big institutions were well into 
the million dollars for ultimate value, and 
time has proved that these loans were very 
successful as far as the bank was concerned 
in the payoff. 

Property values from the inception of the 
present First National Bank up to the present 
time have seen an amazing change in both the 
land value and the actual cost of the various 
structures. From ’34 to ’40 the values were 
fairly static in construction. However, farm 
values were increasing at an amazing rate. 

We consider 1940 the turning point for 
the upgrading of all commodities for value. 
In 1940, the factor for construction was 100 
even. As of 1959, the construction factor 
was 387. This factor was not a percentage. 
However, it does show the amazing increase 
in valuations. 

In 1934 to 1940, the First National Bank 
financed a group of brick-veneer homes 
in Reno which were in the 900square-foot 
class. The most expensive home, including 
the street work, the side-walks, and the 
landscaping was $7,200 for sales value. 
These properties as of toady, even with the 
more than 20 years’ depreciation, will now 
appraise at a figure which will justify an 
FHA loan of $14,000, and I will concur in 
these. In 1934, the mechanic’s wages against a 
piece of construction represented 73 percent 
of the total cost of the construction. As for 
land values in 1934, the maximum I would 
permit for a lot in the southwest section of 



30 


Alton E. Glass 


Reno from California Avenue south and 
Arlington west was $450 for the lot. Today, 
these same lots will carry a price tag of $7,000, 
and it is impossible to buy anything in the 
neighborhood for less. 

Farms have advanced more slowly than 
city properties. However, with the change 
in agricultural methods, alfalfa production 
has increased from two and one-half tons 
to the acre to five-plus tons per acre at a 
reasonable advance in actual operation cost. 
Therefore, where we used to appraise farm 
land, especially alfalfa land, at $90 per acre, a 
$350 per acre valuation can now be justified 
on this same acreage. 

Livestock had always been a commodity 
which cannot be pegged from year to year 
until the actual market has been established 
by the various cattle buyers. I remember 
distinctly in the early spring of 1950, it was 
difficult to purchase a cow for $350. However, 
in my appraisal of livestock at that time, I 
would not exceed $125 for any cow in any 
location. The loaning officers gave me a 
very bad time in the early summer and late 
summer. However, in the late fall of 1950, 
the bottom dropped out of the cow market, 
and the cow which was purchased for $350 
as of the early spring was resold at $90. This 
should have been my signal to say, “I told you 
so.” However, I was so busy checking up on 
the chattel mortgages throughout the state, 
that I simply did not have time to justify my 
appraisal valuations on the livestock. 

The farm values in their increase reflect 
the use of proper fertilizers and mechanical 
equipment which did a better job than the 
old-time methods, and the better handling 
of irrigation for these various crops. All these 
factors reflect in the ultimate valuation of the 
acreage. 

Nevada is a peculiar state inasmuch as it 
contains 110,000 square miles of area, which 


is over 70 million acres. However, of this 
70 million acres, there is approximately 9 
percent which is actual agricultural land and 
land under irrigation. Irrigated areas such as 
Fallon, Yerington, Smith Valley, Lovelock, and 
the areas along the Humboldt River to Wells, 
Nevada, all represent primary water rights 
which assure crop production in the average 
year. Therefore, these areas are entitled to 
better valuations than outlying areas such 
as the Tonopah district, the Eureka district, 
the Austin district, and isolated areas such as 
these. Carson Valley, of course, is considered 
one of the best areas throughout the state in 
both crop production and actual net return 
of the investment per acre. 

However, it must be remembered that 
in the past 25 years, there have been many 
speculative purchases on farm land. The 
values represented in these purchases can 
never be reconciled to net returns by crop 
production. The only hope of realizing on the 
initial purchase of these lands would be if the 
areas were close enough to cities such as Reno 
or Las Vegas where potential subdivisions can 
be made of the areas. However, the primary 
intent of many of these purchases was for tax 
write-off on big estates. The losses taken in 
the actual operation of these farms could be 
deductions on internal revenue taxes. 

We have one particular example fairly 
close to Reno. The property was purchased in 
1934 for $185 per acre straight across. At the 
time the property would not show a 6 percent 
net return on $80 per acre. The purchaser 
immediately spent some $60,000 on a home, 
some $27,000 corrals and feed yards. He also 
went as far as putting in 6-inch crushed gravel 
roadways around the entire feed-yard setup. 

I knew the gentleman quite well. One 
day he stopped me in the bank and asked 
me, “What do you think of my setup out 
there?” My answer to him was, “Don’t ask 



My Work as Appraiser 


31 


me, for I’ll sure tell you rust what I think.” 
“Well,” he said, “That’s exactly what I want 
you to say” So, I told him, “I think you have 
ruined the economic value of every farm 
in our immediate community, and I’ll tell 
you why The farms in the immediate area 
will show probably a 6 percent net return 
on a maximum $100 per acre valuation. 
However, your purchase figure (which can be 
determined by anyone interested) will prove 
that the neighboring farm to this particular 
ranch is at least worth the valuation you paid 
for your initial investment.” The gentleman 
was quite a rough old individual and his 
answer was, “What do I give a damn about 
any farmer? I’m out to make money, and if 
I don’t get at least a $25,000 loss per year on 
my farm, I will feel that I have made a poor 
investment.” That’s the Flick Ranch out here. 
I could probably cite four or five others like 
that, but I think that’s close enough to give an 
idea of just what it is. 

There is one other purchase I remember in 
the Carson Valley. An individual with money 
to throw away purchased 450 acres of very 
poor meadow land and paid $500 per acre 
for this land. 

If this pasturage was used for livestock, 
the maximum valuation under capitalization 
would be $60 per acre. However, here was 
another individual who hoped to show a 
$30,000 loss annually on his purchase price, so 
that from his overall stock and bond holdings, 
he could take the $30,000 as a write-off on his 
tax setup. It’s the Gilbert ranch on the west 
side of Carson Valley just about due west of 
Minden. 

Then there is the Wennhold property in 
Carson Valley, where you cross the river going 
from Minden to Centerville. I appraised that. 
There are two brothers who own the property 
jointly. I appraised a maximum of $300 per 
acre for their good alfalfa, $200 for their grain 


land, $150 per acre for their fair pasture, 
and so forth. One brother thought that was 
just fine; and the other brother said, “Why, 
you stupid dummy, I can sell that for $500 
an acre!” I said, “O.K., I’m a stupid dummy, 
but you’re a stupider dummy, if you don’t 
sell tomorrow morning on the basis of $550, 
because nobody can buy that place and farm 
it and come out with a net return on that kind 
of an investment.” So, that’s what you get on 
farm acreage like that. 

Starting with the Las Vegas areas, and 
especially the areas from Glendale down to 
the Lake Mead, you simply cannot purchase 
an acre in that part of the world, because 
it is held by the third generation of the old 
Mormon settlers for the area. 

We have a peculiar situation in that part 
of the world where there are five row crops 
per year taken from each acreage in the area. 
This is the only area in the state of Nevada 
on which more than $1,000 per acre can be 
assessed as a true economic value for the 
particular property. This is due entirely to the 
five crops which are rotated per year. They 
start with radishes, go to tomato plants. From 
there they go to carrots and beans. Then they 
go to melons, and from there, the final fall 
crops, which is pumpkins and so forth. 

In the meantime, this southern Nevada area 
is peculiar to the production of mononuclear 
sugar beet seed. This mononuclear seed 
produces but one big beet per seed; and 
usually produces a beet that will run better 
than 17 percent sugar content in the ultimate 
sugar recovery. This is a very profitable crop. 
However, it is a crop that requires excess 
attention and will take some 14 months for 
complete recovery of the actual seed. 

During the year, each crop must 
have a certain amount of fertilizer, and a 
repreparation of the seed bed for the crops 
as they are rotated throughout the year. It is 



32 


Alton E. Glass 


an expensive operation. However, the return 
in the average year will show better than 8 
percent net return on a thousand dollars per 
acre for value. 

From there, we go to the Pahrump area 
which is northwest of Las Vegas some 80 
miles. In this particular area, we have the 
production of cotton, which now has a quota 
of some 4,200 acres of producing cotton, 
which justifies the new cotton gin which has 
been constructed at Pahrump Valley. 

It is also not unusual to see seven cuttings 
of alfalfa per year in this area. The alfalfa starts 
to mature in April and the last crop comes off 
in December. Where this alfalfa will seldom 
be better than No. 2 U.S. Leafy at about 14 
percent protein content, the excess tonnage 
produced and the ready market in the Los 
Angeles area (which has lost so much of its 
alfalfa-producing ground, to subdivisions) 
makes the crop a readily salable commodity. 

The irrigation for the Pahrump district 
is all done by wells or artesian water from 
the district. In northern Nevada, it is not 
profitable to pump water for the production 
for alfalfa or grain; while in this southern area 
with the excess tonnage produced per year, it 
is quite profitable to pump, even though the 
present water lift is about 175 feet against the 
40-foot lift as of 1930. 

Alfalfa in the northern areas will 
produce, under present conditions of proper 
fertilization and proper irrigation, five tons 
per acre. However, the tonnage on this 
alfalfa often goes No. 1, U.S. Extra Leafy, 
Extra Green, with a protein value of 17 to 19 
percent. The differential makes quite a bit of 
difference in the actual tonnage value of this 
hay, because it will go as much farther in the 
feeding of fattening livestock and will produce 
a firmer flesh on the animal. 

It is up to the appraiser to establish a 
budget for these crops. In the Las Vegas area, 


where you have five rotating crops per acre 
per year, it is really a headache. However, 
these headaches extend over to the northern 
Nevada areas and also to the livestock budgets 
that must be written annually for each 
livestock loan made by the bank. 

I remember distinctly one of our sizeable 
operators who submitted a budget of $ 125,000 
as his annual cost for his livestock. When I 
processed this budget in my own way, I came 
up with an annual cost of $187,000 against 
his $125,000. The man was a good operator; 
however, he was certainly no accountant and 
had missed many of the actual vital features 
which are chargeable to the production of 
his livestock. Not alone is the item of the hay 
which he produced to feed this livestock and 
fed directly to the livestock. This in itself was a 
big amount. He had completely neglected his 
taxes; he had completely disregarded his range 
costs, and he was to operate his 6,000 head of 
cattle with two men—a physically impossible 
condition under any circumstance. We had 
quite a controversy as to whether his figure 
was the right figure or whether mine was the 
right figure. 

However, we set the budget up on the 
basis of my estimate. At the end of the 
operating season, we refigured his actual cost 
and it came to $188,540. The operator had bet 
me a hat that I was wrong on my figure and 
I still have to collect that hat at the present 
date. (That was a rancher out in Fallon. But 
you don’t like to name names, because after 
all, this is confidential stuff as far as the bank 
is concerned.) I think a reader will probably 
know who it is because there’s darn few large 
budgets. There were four budgets which 
exceeded $100,000 in annual operation costs, 
and they were all spreads of 5,000 to 12,000 
head of cattle. 

Crop budgets from the Elko area are 
not absolutely essential in making chattel 



My Work as Appraiser 


33 


mortgages, because in this area, the chattel 
mortgage is predicated on the quality and 
number of livestock which are offered as 
collateral. In this particular area, we have 
the wonderful summer range north of Elko 
which is used practically exclusively by the 
Elko livestock growers, and the excellent 
operations for winter usage at Elko or through 
the Lamoille district past Jiggs and into the 
White River Valley 

The White River Valley is quite a notable 
area, as it is an immense spread of the finest 
white sage I know of in the state. I remember 
distinctly taking a Government man who 
had never seen white sage growing into this 
area. By the speedometer, we measured a 
distance of 27 miles of solid white sage from 
end to end, with about a six-mile width to this 
particular area. Throughout the White River 
Valley the farmers have established metal 
corn cribs to supplement the winter feeding 
of livestock for the area; especially the sheep 
men who utilize this particular district. 

Elko County is a big empire as far as the 
country goes. It is my recollection there is 
in excess of 16,000 square miles within the 
borders of the county. Elko County has always 
been considered one of the finest livestock 
counties we have in this state and in other 
states as well. The range to the north of the 
mountains from Elko proper is simply choice. 
It has been my privilege to ride the entire 
district at various times and there are natural 
meadows scattered throughout this immense 
empire that are simply choice in both native 
grasses and grasses with high protein content. 
Therefore, when animals are completely 
healthy, so are the strong calves at their side 
when they are brought into the winter range. 

Most of the operators in this particular 
area since the inception of the Taylor Grazing 
Act, which has limited the actual sheep 
operating in this district by more than 70 


percent, have developed all of the range areas 
into a much better condition than they were 
25 years ago. Most of the operators have been 
very selective in the quality of bull which they 
put with the livestock. The result is that a 
weaner animal which is to be sold, or a short 
yearling which is to go to market, are some 
of the finest livestock the buyers are anxious 
to pickup. 

The winter areas along the Humboldt 
River from Deeth to Carlin are excellent 
winter locations, and the livestock operators 
are very careful to supplement the hay and 
grain fed in cold winters with oil cake to 
keep the animals in good flesh throughout 
the cold winters. It is not unusual to see -45° 
temperatures in the Elko country. 

As we go farther south into Clover Valley, 
Lamoille Valley, Jiggs Valley, and Ruby 
Valley, we again have big spreads of excellent 
permanent pasture and considerable alfalfa 
areas. It is rather unusual to find alfalfa in an 
area where winters get down to -45° However, 
I know of one spread in Ruby Valley where 
a spring freshet cut a channel through an 
alfalfa field some 18 feet deep. The owner of 
this particular property and myself measured 
a tap root on an exposed root along side of 
this channel that was 18 feet long. The owner 
claimed that this alfalfa had been in for 22 
years and he was cutting better than two 
tons per acre on the spread. That’s something 
nobody ever heard of before, because I took 
that up to the University here and they said 
that it can’t be. 

In 1934, I was appointed as one of the 
appraisers to count the McIntyre herd which 
was operated out of the 71 Ranch east of Elko. 
The depression and subsequent cattle price 
had put this operator out of business, and 
the count of the livestock was for a take-over 
under the mortgage existing. There were some 
1,800 head of Black Galloway livestock which 



34 


Alton E. Glass 


had been run on open range and were about 
as wild as any deer in the country. This was 
the meanest rodeo it has ever been my misery 
to assist in rounding up. It took quite a crew 
of men to keep these animals headed for the 
pasture from which they were to be shipped 
to the California areas. Our last count was 
an overall count at the gate into the main 71 
Ranch property. We had been out for some 
five days and we were all dead tired, as well as 
our horses being about all in. It was my job to 
stand at the gate and gate-count the animals 
for a final check for the spread. I was so weary 
that I threw my leg over the saddle horn to 
rest my position in the saddle. One of the cows 
took exception to my position and butted my 
horse when he was not looking. She put my 
horse down and I fell beneath my horse. The 
cow came over the horse to stamp me into 
the ground. Very fortunately, there were two 
good cow hands on the job with their riatas, 
and they roped the cow before she could get 
more than a couple of stamps at me. Suffice 
to say I was more scared that I was hurt, but 
that was a pretty tough experience to have to 
go through. 

The Reese River area has a fairly sizeable 
spread for livestock and is strictly a livestock 
area. All crops grown in the immediate 
section are fed back to the livestock which is 
run in the winter time on the sizeable ranches 
which border the Reese River channel. In the 
summertime, the cattle from the Reese River 
ranges are sent out to areas such as Antelope 
Valley, Monitor Valley, and even over into 
Railroad Valley. 

As we get into the central part of the state, 
which is north of Round Mountain and south 
of Austin and Eureka, we have year-round 
operations on several of the big ranches; such 
ranches as the Twin River spread and the 
Peavine Ranch north and east of Tonopah. 
These are year-round operations. Where the 


livestock is ranged in the summer-time, of f of 
the actual ownership of land and onto Taylor 
Grazing area, the cattle are never more than 
80 miles from the home ranch. 

We have year-round operations on the 
two Fish Lake Valleys. The Fish Lake Valley 
north and east of Tonopah some 84 miles is a 
part of the old Jim Butler ranch holdings, and 
is an excellent summer range for livestock. 
From this ranch, the livestock is brought 
down and turned onto the desert, which is 
some 60 miles from Tonopah and south of 
the Tonopah-Ely highway. The other Fish 
Lake Valley is north and west of Tonopah 
some 40 miles. The principal ownership in 
this valley is the E. L. Cord spread where 
Mr. Cord operates a year-round pure-bred 
Hereford bull enterprise. This Fish Lake 
Valley goes west and south from the E. L. 
Cord spread. This E. L. Cord spread was the 
original Chiatovich Ranch which controlled 
practically the entire valley at one time. 

On the extreme southwest end of this 
valley is a mining district called Lido, where 
it is my understanding that Art Linkletter 
has recently purchased an empire. It is a 
little difficult to understand Mr. Linkletter s 
purchase of this property. I have known it 
for many years, and I have never seen a cow 
on the entire area on which you could not 
hang your hat on her hips or count her ribs 
at a distance of 100 feet. There simply is very, 
very little browse and there are areas where it 
is 15 miles between water holes throughout 
the entire spread. 

As we come into the northwestern portion 
of Nevada, we strike the Fallon, Yerington, 
and the Smith Valley areas, which are good 
farming areas and yet, at the same time, are 
principally operated as livestock units. Most 
of these units summer the cattle and sheep in 
the Toiyabe National Forest and the old Mono 
National Forest of the Bridgeport and Bodie 



My Work as Appraiser 


35 


Hills areas. Most of the livestock grown in this 
area are handled by good operators, and the 
quality and finish of livestock as they go to 
market are probably the best outside of Elko 
in the entire state of Nevada. 

In the southern areas of the state of 
Nevada, in the Caliente country on south, 
there are several sizable live stock operators. 
However, this is an entirely different setup in 
livestock, as most of the animals from this 
part of the world are either Angus or Brahma 
stock. There are two especially good operators 
in this part of the country—the Stewart 
brothers and Mr. Taylor, who operates out of 
the Glendale district. 

Mr. Taylor has one of the finest spreads 
of Charolais cows I have ever seen. All of the 
animals are registered. The light cows will 
run around 1,500 pounds per animal against 
the average Hereford animal of Elko County 
at 950 pounds. The Brahma cattle which 
this gentleman operates are really beautiful 
animals. And may I add at this point, I do 
not like Brahma cattle. However, I have 
seen better net returns come from Brahma 
livestock than I have ever seen come off of 
Herefords. 

I remember distinctly one year that one 
of our operators from Las Vegas asked for a 
commitment to purchase 700 head of weaner 
Brahmas from the Texas country. At that time, 
he could purchase these weaners at 8<t f.o.b. 
the trucks in Texas, and could lay them down 
on his ranch for approximately 12C per animal 
pound. The average sale up to this time for 
fairly well-finished Brahma livestock brought 
18<t to 20<t on the Los Angeles market. With 
the loaning officer of the bank in Las Vegas, 
we authorized the purchase of these weaners. 

When I returned to Reno, the president of 
the Bank called me into his office and his first 
remark was, “I thought you hated Brahmas.” 
My reply was, “I do hate Brahmans, but I don’t 


hate the profit that this individual is bound 
to make on this purchase.” The president’s 
remark was, “Well, it’s on your neck if he 
doesn’t make a good profit.” It turned out 
that on the sale of the finished fat yearling 
Brahmas Which went to the Los Angeles 
market, the average was 19<t per pound with 
an average gain of 196 pounds on each of 
the weaners that he fed out. Suffice to say the 
president had nothing further to say about 
the purchase of the livestock. 

We have one more area in the state of 
Nevada which is strictly a livestock district, 
and that is the area from Sand Springs north 
of Reno through the Buffalo Meadows area 
and into the Gerlach and Granite Range area, 
and north to the Soldier’s Meadow Ranch in 
the northern area of Washoe County. 

In the immediate area of Sand Springs 
we have the Smoke Creek Ranch and the 
Buffalo Meadow Ranch which is a part 
of the Dewey Parker holdings. This is 
strictly a desert spread. Where there is some 
permanent pasture on the Smoke Creek 
area and approximately 80 acres of alfalfa 
at Buffalo Meadows area, the livestock are 
run for about 11 months out of the year on 
strictly open range country. This is one of the 
cheapest operational costs we had in the entire 
portfolio in the Pirst National Bank. However, 
the calf crop which is obtained from this sort 
of operation brings the actual net return on 
the capitalized investment to about the same 
as we would have in the Elko country, with 
livestock which is never finished as well as the 
Elko country beef. 

As we go farther to the east, we run into 
the big Granite Land and Livestock Company 
which comprises four ranches—Squaw 
Creek, Deep Hole, Granite Mountain, and 
the Fry Ranch. The livestock for this spread 
are wintered on this area, with the exception 
of feeder steers which are brought into the 



36 


Alton E. Glass 


Fallon area and fed through feed yards in that 
district. As we go north from these spreads 
we are into strictly open range areas. The 
livestock taken from these areas is never in 
the quality of breeding or finish that will be 
shown in any of the other livestock-producing 
areas throughout the state. 

Going still farther east, we come into the 
Winnemucca area, which again is strictly a 
livestock operation. At the present, they are 
developing considerable farm products (hay 
and grain) in the Orovada district, which 
is an area on the old Kings River channel. 
These farm crops are developed by pumped 
water. However, the pumping lift for the 
pumps makes it a profitable operation, 
as the maximum water lift at the present 
moment is not to exceed 50 feet. I put that in 
because anybody that understands pumping 
operations knows that the cost of pumping 
water is an inverse ratio and not a direct ratio 
as you have to go down. 

Along with observing ranching and 
livestock conditions, it has been my privilege 
to have seen practically every town in the state 
whether it be a town of a saloon and a grocery 
store with three or four dwellings up to the 
Las Vegas, Reno, and Elko cities in our state. 

I passed through Las Vegas in 1914. We 
had been on a General Land Office survey in 
Death Valley, and the stage from Death Valley 
to Tonopah had quit for the winter season. We 
therefore had to come back through Las Vegas 
to Salt Lake City and then back to Reno. Las 
Vegas, at that time, was nothing really but a 
whistle stop on the railroad. 

Reno, as of 1934, was a growing town 
but was not expanding very rapidly. Elko, 
Winnemucca, Carson City, Lallon, and 
Yerington were fairly static as far as growth 
goes. However, they were sound communities 
and all they needed was better commodity 
prices for livestock and farm products to give 


them the necessary impetus for increased 
growth. 

The Ely area was one district that had two 
operating banks which were very jealous of 
their successes and were not in the market to 
permit the Lirst National Bank to enter their 
areas, it has always been the policy of the Lirst 
National Bank to enter a district only where 
their services were needed. Therefore, the 
Ely area was completely out of my province, 
except when it was necessary for me to contact 
someone in the city, or on my trips from Elko, 
through Ely to Caliente and into the Las Vegas 
district. 

Tonopah is no longer the mining district. 
Where there is some operation, it is on 
such a small basis that mining cannot be 
considered the principal business of the area. 
It is the county seat of Nye County, which 
is an immense empire in itself, and there 
is enough business outside of the county 
operation to justify several good stores. Recent 
development in Tonopah is primarily due to 
the Radar station which was constructed by 
the Government on Mt. Oddie, just to the west 
of Tonopah. This brought in a component of 
some 130 men, and was quite an impetus to 
the economic conditions of Tonopah. 

There was a justification for a branch bank 
in Tonopah, due to the immense area which 
this branch would service. The district went 
almost to Austin to the north, and east to the 
Railroad Valley district. It serviced all of the 
Fish Lake areas, and the entire district south 
to Beatty, and southeast to Alamo. Therefore, 
there was justification for a bank, considering 
the fact that Tonopah had developed through 
tourism several good motels as well as shops 
within the town limits. 

Yerington is another town that has had a 
fairly sizeable growth, due in part to the big 
copper operation which had been developed in 
the district. However, Yerington missed a good 



My Work as Appraiser 


37 


bet by not being a little more cooperative with 
the Anaconda people. The Anaconda people 
put in a town of their own with proper dress 
shops and so forth to service the community 
which was necessary to operate the big mill. 
Yerington has had some development, but 
not the development it was entitled to if it 
had been more cooperative with the copper 
concern. This breaks their heart now, but it’s 
nobody’s fault but their own. 

Fallon has had a substantial growth, due 
in part to the big Government air field built 
to the southeast of Fallon, and in part to 
the actual conditions which have prevailed 
in Fallon in the past few years. There are 
many fairly sizeable shops and possibly a 30 
percent increase in the residence district in 
Fallon in the past 25 years. I therefore look 
to Fallon as having better potentials than 
Yerington or some of the other outlying 
districts. 

Carson Valley, with Minden and 
Gardnerville, has had a fairly substantial 
growth. However, we have the peculiar 
condition in Carson Valley that third 
generation operators still hold onto every 
acre that was owned primarily by the original 
settlers of the district. And, therefore, the 
expansion for the towns has not been too 
great. However, there have been some big 
sales made in the district to speculators, and 
this has helped out in part for the economics 
of the district. 

Carson City has had a rather phenomenal 
growth. This is due primarily to the 
governmental agencies which have been 
developed in the past 25 years, plus the fact 
that we have an annual legislature in the 
city, plus the further fact that there have 
been a great many retired families who have 
moved into the area, purchased or. built 
excellent homes and are making the area 
their domiciles. 


We go east to Lovelock, which has 
had some expansion within the town 
itself. The growth has been rather slow 
in this immediate area. However, since 
the inception of Rye Patch dam and the 
proper control of the primary water rights 
for the Upper Valley and the Lower Valley 
as well, there is no question but what the 
farming areas have expanded by at least 35 
percent. And this expansion has been in 
proper development to justify a good farm 
production for the area. E. L. Cord has a big 
ranch in the county. 

The Tule Camp operation is headed by 
a group of five individuals who have made 
some wonderful expansion in both alfalfa 
and permanent pasture areas to the district. 
This was done primarily through their own 
development of deep drain ditches for the 
new seed bed areas. The alfalfa production in 
several instances has run better than five and 
one-half tons per acre on three-year alfalfa 
development. The grain crops for the area 
are produced by Mr. Jacobson, who operates 
some 2,200 acres in the immediate Lower 
Valley area. His crop recovery is in the area of 
45 bushels per acre on wheat and 38 bushels 
per acre on barley (that’s high). 

Going farther north and east, we are in 
the Winnemucca district. Winnemucca has 
had a rather unusual development as far as 
the city areas are concerned. There are some 
five subdivisions which have been developed 
in the past 20 years, and there has been some 
excellent motel and hotel development in the 
city proper. This is due primarily to the fact 
that it is a breaking point in the trip to Salt 
Lake, if one gets weary. And also, it is getting 
to be supplemental break-off station for the 
tourist traffic that goes to the north to Boise 
and to eastern Oregon. It is my understanding 
that the traffic through Winnemucca has 
developed 47 percent in the past years. 



38 


Alton E. Glass 


Going farther to the east, we come to 
Battle Mountain. Battle Mountain has had 
some development. However, I think that it 
can be said that Battle Mountain is a fairly 
static community as far as home expansion 
is concerned. The big property which is 
known as the old 25 Ranch is now under the 
control of the Jenkins Land and Livestock 
Company, which is practically 100 percent of 
the surrounding areas. There has been some 
mining development in the past few years. 
However, it has not been extensive enough 
to increase the population of the community 
of Battle Mountain. 

Carlin is our next stop as we go east, and 
Carlin is primarily a railroad junction. With 
the advent of diesel-operated equipment, 
Carlin has lost in population rather than 
gained, and we can consider it a very definitely 
static location. There has some development 
on each side of Highway 40, but not enough 
to bolster the community as far as population 
is concerned. 

Elko is our next stop. Elko has had an 
excellent increase in population, mercantile 
development and general economic growth in 
the past 25 years. It is the hub of an immense 
area, clear into Idaho and as far south as Ely 
and Eureka. Therefore, it serves an empire, 
and there is very definite justification for the 
mercantile and the subdivision developments 
which Elko has experienced in the past 20 
years. 

Further to the east, we have the little town 
of Wells, which 40 years ago was nothing 
but a whistle stop on the railroad. However, 
it is now the junction of the highway which 
goes north into the Idaho and Yellowstone 
National Park areas and south to Ely and the 
Las Vegas areas with Highway 40 bisecting 
the town. There is no question but what Wells 
has more than doubled in population in the 
past 35 years. 


This means then, when I mentioned the 
towns increasing in population and so forth, 
that it is easier for the people who live there to 
service their loans. In each of the places that I 
have named, there is a bank. Battle Mountain 
had the Bank of Commerce there and the 
First National Bank never even thought of 
going into that area. They are very jealous of 
their prerogative out there, too. The Jenkins 
outfit owns the whole community; therefore, 
there is no chance of agricultural expansion. 
The only expansion you can hope for is the 
mines, and the mines haven’t proved, as yet. 
Of course, you do have the big operation of 
the Getchell outfit not too far away, and this 
new operation of a big iron mine due south 
of Battle Mountain. 

One of the most phenomenal changes 
that I have experienced in the state of Nevada 
is the development of the highway systems 
going east, going south, and going north 
from Reno, as well as highway 50 from Reno 
through Fallon, Austin, and into Ely. This fast 
transportation to these various areas has in 
part played a very definite factor in the growth 
in these communities. 

It used to be a long, weary, 10-hour 
drive from Reno to Elko, due entirely to the 
condition of the non-paved roads, and the 
chuck holes, and the dust storms which one 
experienced on the trip to Elko. Elko now is 
an easy 5-hour drive, and a comfortable drive 
at that. The trip to Fallon used to be two and 
one-half hours of hard driving. Fallon is now 
one hour from Reno and a very comfortable 
trip. We used to figure about three hours to 
Yerington and now it is about an hour and 
one-half to an hour and three quarters away. 
Tonopah used to be a 12-hour hard drive. 
Tonopah can now be reached in four and 
one-half hours with a comfortable drive. Our 
trip to Las Vegas before the Bonanza Air Lines 
facility was inaugurated, used to be 14 to 16 



My Work as Appraiser 


39 


hard hours of travel. We normally broke the 
trip down into Tonopah the first night and Las 
Vegas the next night. However Las Vegas is 
now about 9 hours fairly comfortable driving 
from Rena, and therefore when it is necessary, 
to drive to the area is the present mode of 
transportation. 

The Bonanza Air Lines was a godsend 
to the Reno people connected with banking 
facilities necessary to service the community 
of Las Vegas. At the inception of the First 
National Bank’s moving into Las Vegas, three 
trips per year were all that were necessary for 
my department to service the area. However, 
at my retirement in 1958, I made 16 trips a 
year to Las Vegas to service the necessary 
loans which came from the various branches. 

It was often necessary in our bank 
operation to go as far south as Bishop, 
California. Bishop used to be a very difficult 
15-hour trip from Reno. Bishop is now a 
comfortable 6-hour trip from Rena. And the 
sideroads in the Bridgeport areas and the 
roads necessary to go to the Benton district 
are in such excellent shape that a round-trip 
to the community is not a difficult day. The 
roads from Bridgeport down through the 
walker River canyon into the Smith Valley 
area have all been paved and have cut the 
travel time by more than 50 percent to these 
various communities. I believe that these 
highways and proper secondary roads which 
have been developed in the past 40 years are 
one of the primary factors which has made 
Nevada develop in population and economic 
growth as it has. 




6 


Summary and Conclusion 


In civic activities, I was and am a member 
of the American Legion. For seven years, I 
held down the job of secretary for the Lion’s 
Club; but as the appraisal job developed in the 
bank, I simply had to drop this activity as I 
was so often in the field when the organization 
met. I have been a member of the Masonic 
Order since 1919, having gone through the 
Scottish Rite and the Shrine as well. From ’24 
to ’29, I was quite active in this lodge work; 
however, from ’29 on, there was so much 
field work that I practically eliminated my 
Masonic work. 

In 1924, I was married to Mila Lucille 
Coffin, and two sons were the issue from this 
marriage. Both boys are into their thirties at 
the present time, and have families of their 
own. We were very happy in the selection 
of their wives and the family is still a very 
close-knit unit. 

From 1935 to the present time, there has 
been so much activity in the expansion of 
the bank and the increase in business, that 
there was very little outside activity for me. I 
would finish a “must” job in Las Vegas and get 


home in time to pick up another “must” job 
in Elko. By the time I would finish the Elko 
assignment, there would be an accumulation 
of appraisals in Reno that needed immediate 
attention, and by the time I would get that 
portion of the work cleared up, the routine 
would be right back where I was before. 

When you are working for an organization 
where there are between 40 and 60 loaning 
officers, each one with the most important job 
in the bank—to be attended to immediately— 
it is very difficult to set any routine of where 
you will be and when you will be there. 
Nevada is such a large state, with the territory 
running from Searchlight in the south and 
McDermitt on the north, and from Wendover 
on the east to Bishop, California on the west, 
that it is just a guess as to where you can be 
at any particular time. However we seemed 
to get the work done and that is the part that 
really counts. 

Looking back, I had several chances to 
get into other departments in the bank, but I 
remained firm in my request to stay put in the 
Appraisal Department. I repeat, Nevada is a 



42 


Alton E. Glass 


big state, and there is an extreme of diversity 
in crops and products from the northern 
border to the Las Vegas area. It takes time to 
learn the various areas, and it takes study to 
be familiar with the proper crops in the areas. 

A top appraiser must know standard 
practices for sheep, cattle, hogs, grain, hay 
(both alfalfa and grass), as well as timothy; 
the many row crops grown in southern 
Nevada, such as cotton, sugar beet seeds, 
tomato plants, truck garden vegetables, and 
so forth. Budgets must be made up for each 
of these items, and that in itself is a big job 
as cost of production is never static and you 
must be current on the cost of production 
for each year. All these add up to experiences 
plus keeping up to date on new methods, 
new crops, changing economic conditions, 
and expansion of services to the borrowers. I 
always enjoyed this work, especially after 1940 
when the real recovery from the depression 
started and has continued to this date. 

There are conditions which are dictated 
to the banks today which I do not like and 
I cannot reconcile in my 40 years of contact 
with banking methods; continued farm 
subsidies; loose and easy credits in F.H.A. 
and V.A., practically nothing down and 30 
years to pay out on a home. Government 
dictation on imports and the tariffs on such 
items have robbed the public of the right to 
solve their own problems as independent 
operators. There is just too much government 
control in the hands of incompetents to even 
solve the confused economies of modern- 
day operations. By these statements, I do not 
mean to imply that the country is headed 
for another 1929 or ’33 depression, but I feel 
that it is high time that the individuals have 
the right to conduct their own affairs without 
governmental agencies dictating how, when, 
and where. 


It has all been good fun and a worthwhile 
endeavor. It has been a constant revelation 
of changes and new things The present-day 
standard of living is so much better than 
60 years ago that it is hard to believe we 
advanced this far. Distance is no longer an 
item to be considered and what used to be 
the maximum of luxury is now commonplace 
to all of us. I have enjoyed the changes and 
new improvements and I expect to see more 
changes and more improvements as time 
goes on. 

The world conflicts that are in evidence in 
so many places I interpret as “growing pains,” 
and I believe that the day will come when 
history will prove this to be true. Scientific 
advances, cultural achievements, better living 
for future generations. In the meantime, life 
is too precious to waste on backward looking 
and it is up to each of us to do his part in 
seeing that the world is a better place in 
which to live. This will take work, tolerance, 
study, sympathetic understanding of the other 
fellow to accomplish. And that relentless 
element of time will be the ultimate factor in 
accomplishing this condition. 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



44 


Alton E. Glass 


Alamo, Nevada, 79 

American Legion, 86 

Anaconda Copper Company, 25, 79 

Anderson, Harold, 41 

Angus cattle, 74 

Antelope Valley, California, 2, 10 

Antelope Valley, Nevada, 73 

Antioch, California, 34 

Arizona state, 54, 58 

Army, U. S., 25 

Au Revoir , 14-15 

Austin, Nevada, 59, 63, 73, 

79, 83 


Baku, 31 

Bank of America, 19, 50, 53 
Battle Mountain, Nevada, 27, 
81-82, 83 

Beatty, Nevada, 79 
Beaumont, Texas, 36, 41 
Bell, Agnes, 14 
Bell Telephone Company 
Belmont mines, 34- 
Bender, C. T. 

Berkeley, Ca] 

19, 4' 

Billir 
Bisl 



13 

:nia, 2, 4, 


Boardv^Cl F., 14 
Boardman, Horace P., 24 
Bodie, California, 74 
Boise, Idaho, 81 
Bonanza Air Lines, 84 
Bradley, J. R., store, 18 
Brahma cattle, 74, 75-76 
Bridgeport California, 4, 17 
18, 74, 84 

Brookshire, John, 37 
Brown, Norman, 19 
Bruner, Wellman, 14 
Buffalo Meadows, 76 
Buffalo Meadows ranch, 76 
Burnhagen, "Doc," 41-42 


Caliente, Nevada, 74, 78 
California, state, 45, 54, 72 
California Joint Stock Land 
Bank, 19, 44-47 

California, University, 22, 25 
Cann Drug Company, 17 
Cardinal family, 7 
Carlin, Nevada, 71, 82 
Carpenter, F. R., 58 
Carson City, Nevada, 3, 7, 50, 

53, 60, 78, 80 

Carson Valley, Nevada.^60, 63-64, 
65-66, 80 (see also Minden 
and Gardnervi 
Caspian Sea, 

Caton, 

CCC C] 

, 65 

ttle, 75 
ay E., 13-14 
ranch, 74 
ichester family, 3 
Chinese, 8 

Churchill, Hazel Glass, 7, 9, 

10, 12 

Clover Valley, Nevada, 71 
Coffin, Stanford, 21 
Colorado state, 45, 58 
Concord, California, 34 
Contra Costa County, California, 
1, 6, 34 

Cord, E. L., 73-74, 80 
Crowley, Basil, 25 
Crowley Lake, California, 4 


D 


Dalton, Clifford and Wilson 
drugstore, 16 

Darch, Rowena Glass, 7, 9, 10, 

12, 20 

Death Valley, California, 77 

Deep Hole ranch, 76 

Deeth, Nevada, 71 

Delta Delta Delta sorority, 24 

Democrats, 41 

Dessar, Delwin, 25 

Diablo, Mt., 6 




Original Index: For Reference Only 


45 


D 


Dillon, Alice, 14 
Dodd, John, 21 
Doten, Goodwin, 14 
Dressier, William, 17-18, 19 
Durham cattle, 3-4 
Dutch, 32 


Egypt, 31 

Elko, Nevada, 23, 27, 29, 50, 
53, 59, 60, 69, 70, 74, 77, 
78, 82, 83, 86 
Elko County, 70-72, 75 
Ely, Nevada, 23, 45-47, 73, 

76, 78, 82, 83 
English, 6 

Eureka, Nevada, 60, 63, 73, 82 
Exeter district, 12 



Fallon, Nevada, 53, 60, 

74, 77, 78, 79, 83 
Fallon ranch, 5-6 
Farmers' and Merchants 1 
Bank, V" 

Federal Lan^lB^ik, 19, 44 

Federal Housing Administration, 62, 88 

Federal Reserve banks, 48, 49 

Ferguson, W. A., 14 

Field Artillery, U. S., 32-34 

Fink truss, 24 

First National Bank of Nevada, 15, 
47-55, 56, 60-62, 75, 76, 78, 

83, 84 

Fish Lake Valley, Esmeralda County, 

73, 79 

Fish Lake Valley, Nye County, 73-74, 

79 

Flick ranch, 64-65 

Forest Service, U. S., 4, 5-6 

Fowler, Sidney, 21 

Fraley, H., 17 

Fry ranch, 76 


Galloway cattle, 72 
Gardnerville, Nevada, 80 


General Land Office, U. S., 
27-29, 77-78 
Gerlach, Nevada, 76 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
41 

Getchell mine, 83 

Gilbert ranch, 65 

Glass, Alton E., Jr., 86 

Glass, David, 1 

Glass, Frederick Elmer, 1, 2, 

7, 12, 15, 17, 18-19, 20, 44 
Glass, Lester B., 10, 12, 

20, 34 

Glass, Mila Coffin, 20, 86 
Glass, Robert L., 86 
Glass,^hebdosia Hauxhurst, 6-7 

,V$levada, 66 

;Botel, 15 

e Land and Livestock 
Company, 76-77 
Granite Mountain ranch, 76 
Granite range, 76 
Gray, Reid and Wright store, 16 


H 


Halleck, Nevada, 27 
Hansen, Julia, 11 
Hardy family, 3 
Harris, Walter J., 15, 17, 47, 
49-50, 52 

Haseman, Charles, 22-23 
Hawaii, 32 

Hereford cattle, 73, 75 
Holland, 31 
Honolulu, Hawaii, 32 
Howell, Miss, 11 
Humboldt River, 63, 71 


Idaho state, 58, 82 

J 

Jackson, Albert, 25 
Jacobson, Seymour, 81 
Jenkins Land and Livestock 
Company, 81, 83 



46 


Alton E. Glass 


M 


Jiggs, Nevada, 69 
Jiggs Valley, 71 
Jones, C. D., 41 
Jones, J. Claude, 23-24 
Jones, Wendell, 25 
June Lakes, California, 4 


K 


Kennedy, H. H., 15 
Kings River, 77 
Kirman, Richard, 9, 12, 15, 
17, 19, 47, 49-50 
Riight, Charles, 24-25 


Lamoille, Nevada, 69 
Lamoille Valley, 71 
Last Frontier Hotel, 61 
Las Vegas, Nevada, 53, 54, 60 
61, 64, 66, 67, 68, 75, 
77-78, 82, 84, 86 
Lemon Cove, California 
Leon Springs, Texas^1$£-; 
Levi, Sol, 16-17 
Lewis, Charles, 17, lj^HT 
Lido district, ' 

Linkletter, Ari 
Lion's Club, 86 
Long Valley, California, 4 
Los Angeles, California, 12, 
25, 67, 76 

Lovelock, Nevada, 54, 60, 

63, 80 

Me 

McAllister family, 3 
McDermitt, Nevada, 87 
McIntyre ranch, 72 
McKay family, 3 
McKissick Opera House, 16 


Magnolia Petroleum Company, 
36-43 

Mall, William, 4-5 
Mapes, George, 15, 17 
Martinez, California, 29, 34 
Marysville, California, 1 
Masons, 86 
Mead, Lake, 66 
Michigan, University, 41 
Miller and Lux ranch, 1, 2 
Miller cyanide plant, 35 
Minden, Nevada, 53, £x\80 
Moana hot springs, 16 
Monitor Valley, Nevada 
Mono National Forest, 4, 6 


74 


(see also Toiyabe National 
Fc 

Montana state, 58 
ntana Club, 35 
orrapns, 66 

ler, John V., 11 


N 


Natches River, 36, 38, 42 
Negroes, 37-38, 39-40 
Neil, Harper, 25 
Nevada Bank of Commerce, 83 
Nevada Club, see Sigma Nu 
fraternity 

Nevada, University, 14, 15, 16, 
21-26, 27, 71 
New Mexico state, 58 
New Zealand, 21 
Northern Hotel, Ely, 45-46 
Nortonsville, California, 6 
Nye County, Nevada, 78 


O 


Oddie, Mt., 78 
Oregon state, 54, 81 
Overland Hotel, Reno, 15 


M 


Mackay, Clarence, 22 
Mackay Stadium, 22 


Pacific Coast Joint Stock Land 
Bank, 19, 44-47 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


47 


P 


S 


Pahrump Valley, Nevada, 67-68 
Palace Club, Reno, 13 
Paret, Matt, 17 
Parker, Dewey, 76 
Peavine ranch, 73 
Pitts family, 3 

Plymouth Land and Stock Company 
17-19 

Port Arthur, Texas, 36 
Powell family, 3 


Scrugham, James G., 24-25 
Searchlight, Nevada, 87 
Self and Sellman builders, 20 
71 ranch, 72 

Shell Oil Company, 29-32, 34 
Sigma Nu fraternity, 24-25 
Sill, Fort, 32, 33-34 
Silver Mountain, 57 
Smith Valley, Nevada, 17, 18, 
63, 74, 84 



49, 50 

San Francisco Loan Production Credit 
Credit Corporation, 47 
San Jose, California, 6 
San Jose Normal College, 6 
San Ramon, California, 1 
San Ramon Valley, California, 1, 6 


Tonopah and Goldfield railroad 
52 

Topaz, California, 1, 2, 3, 
7-9, 10 

Townsend, "Mud,” 45-46 
Tabert, Archie, 25 
Tracy, C. C., 27 




48 


Alton E. Glass 


T 


Y 


Trans-America Corporation, 50 
Trumble family, 3 
Tulare County, California, 12 
Tule Camp ranch, 80-81 
25 ranch, 81 

Twin Lakes, California, 4 
Twin River ranch, 73 

U 


Yellowstone National Park, 82 
Yerington, Nevada, 53, 60, 63, 
74, 78, 79, 83 
YMCA, 41 

Z 

Zachary Taylor, CAmp, 33 


Utah state, 50, 58 



Wente, Carl, 50, 52, 53, 56 
White River Valley, Nevada, 69-70 
Wiley, William, '25 
Williams, Tom, 21 
Williams, W. W., 23 
Wingfield, George, 15, 17 
Winnemucca, Nevada, 53, 54, 60, 
77, 78, 81 
Woodard, Miss, 10 
Woodland, California, 12 
Wrigley, Ben, 21 
Wyoming state, 58 




