Rodney J. Reynolds: 

A Cold War Politician 
of Nevada in the Fifties 


Interviewee: Rodney J. Reynolds 
Interviewed: 1977 
Published: 1977 

Interviewer: Bruce Walker Reynolds 
UNOHP Catalog #073 


Description 

Rodney J. Reynolds was born on July 31, 1912, in Currie, Nevada. The settlement consisted of a one-room school 
house, a freight house, and a combination general store, post office, meeting place, and saloon. There were also 
three homes, one of which was uninhabited, and six families lived in the surrounding area. 

Reynolds spent nine years in Currie, but his parents knew there were no grand opportunities in Currie and that it 
was no place to raise a family. The family moved to Elko, a large and bustling community of eighteen hundred, in 
the fall of 1921. Elko was the county seat, the division point for the Western Pacific, and the ranching center for 
northern Nevada. His father opened a meat market, bought a house, and Reynolds began his first real education 
at the Elko Grammar School. He finished his secondary education under the tutelage of the well-known educator 
Miss Knemeyer, and was graduated from Elko County High School with a diploma in science. 

The rumblings of the Depression had not yet been felt in Elko when Reynolds left home to attend the Carnegie 
Institute of Technology in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The Depression caused his father to lose his business, and 
Reynolds was forced to return home after only one year of college. The Depression had great consequences for his 
future life. 

In the thirties Reynolds held a multitude of short run-jobs: tank truck diver, surveyor, and procurement clerk for 
the Civilian Conservation Corps restoring Fort Churchill. As a young man he witnessed the revolution of American 
ideals in Roosevelts New Deal policies. In the ensuing years this was to make as great an impression upon him as 
the Depression. 

He married Margaret Ellen Walker of Sparks in 1937, and moved to Reno. He bought the Silver State Lodge, a motel 
built in the twenties for the divorce trade. The motel was located on old Highway 40—now West Fourth Street. He 
owned and operated the Silver State Lodge for twenty-six years. 

During World War II Reynolds worked as a flight dispatcher for Pan-American Airways in the South Pacific on 
the islands of Funafuti, Wallis, and Canton. He returned to Reno in 1945 after the war and established himself as 
a businessman and civic leader. He joined the Rotary Club, was membership chairman and later became director 
of the Reno Chamber of Commerce. Reynolds was elected twice to the state assembly as a Republican in 1952 and 
1954. He was a keen observer of Nevada cold war politics, which he describes in his oral history. 



Rodney J. Reynolds: 

A Cold War Politician 
of Nevada in the Fifties 




Rodney J. Reynolds: 

A Cold War Politician 
of Nevada in the Fifties 


Bruce Reynolds produced this oral history as a student in the 
University of Nevada, Reno, 1977 Summer Session course, 

“Oral History: Method and Technique.” Mr. Reynolds is a student in 

HISTORY AT SANTA CLARA UNIVERSITY, CALIFORNIA. 


An Oral History Conducted by Bruce Walker Reynolds 


University of Nevada Oral History Program 


Copyright 1977 

University of Nevada Oral History Program 
Mail Stop 0324 
Reno, Nevada 89557 
unohp @unr. edu 
http: / / www. unr. edu/ oralhistory 


All rights reserved. Published 1977. 
Printed in the United States of America 


Publication Staff: 
Director: Mary Ellen Glass 


University of Nevada Oral History Program Use Policy 

All UNOHP interviews are copyrighted materials. They may be downloaded and/or 
printed for personal reference and educational use, but not republished or sold. Under 
“fair use” standards, excerpts of up to 1000 words may be quoted for publication without 
UNOHP permission as long as the use is non-commercial and materials are properly 
cited. The citation should include the title of the work, the name of the person or 
people interviewed, the date of publication or production, and the fact that the work 
was published or produced by the University of Nevada Oral History Program (and 
collaborating institutions, when applicable). Requests for permission to quote for other 
publication, or to use any photos found within the transcripts, should be addressed 
to the UNOHP, Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557-0324. 
Original recordings of most UNOHP interviews are available for research purposes 
upon request. 



Contents 

Preface to the Digital Edition ix 

Introduction ix 

A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 1 

Original Index: For Reference Only 29 




Preface to the Digital Edition 


Established in 1964, the University of 
Nevada Oral History Program (UNOHP) 
explores the remembered past through 
rigorous oral history interviewing, creating a 
record for present and future researchers. The 
programs collection of primary source oral 
histories is an important body of information 
about significant events, people, places, 
and activities in twentieth and twenty-first 
century Nevada and the West. 

The UNOHP wishes to make the 
information in its oral histories accessible 
to a broad range of patrons. To achieve 
this goal, its transcripts must speak with 
an intelligible voice. However, no type font 
contains symbols for physical gestures and 
vocal modulations which are integral parts 
of verbal communication. When human 
speech is represented in print, stripped of 
these signals, the result can be a morass of 
seemingly tangled syntax and incomplete 
sentences—totally verbatim transcripts 
sometimes verge on incoherence. Therefore, 
this transcript has been lightly edited. 


While taking great pains not to alter 
meaning in any way, the editor may have 
removed false starts, redundancies, and the 
“uhs,” “ahs,” and other noises with which 
speech is often liberally sprinkled; compressed 
some passages which, in unaltered form, 
misrepresent the chroniclers meaning; and 
relocated some material to place information 
in its intended context. Laughter is represented 
with [laughter] at the end of a sentence in 
which it occurs, and ellipses are used to 
indicate that a statement has been interrupted 
or is incomplete.. .or that there is a pause for 
dramatic effect. 

As with all of our oral histories, while 
we can vouch for the authenticity of the 
interviews in the UNOHP collection, we 
advise readers to keep in mind that these are 
remembered pasts, and we do not claim that 
the recollections are entirely free of error. 
We can state, however, that the transcripts 
accurately reflect the oral history recordings 
on which they were based. Accordingly, each 
transcript should be approached with the 



X 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


same prudence that the intelligent reader 
exercises when consulting government 
records, newspaper accounts, diaries, and 
other sources of historical information. 
All statements made here constitute the 
remembrance or opinions of the individuals 
who were interviewed, and not the opinions 
of the UNOHP. 

In order to standardize the design of all 
UNOHP transcripts for the online database, 
most have been reformatted, a process that 
was completed in 2012. This document may 
therefore differ in appearance and pagination 
from earlier printed versions. Rather than 
compile entirely new indexes for each volume, 
the UNOHP has made each transcript fully 
searchable electronically. If a previous version 
of this volume existed, its original index has 
been appended to this document for reference 
only. A link to the entire catalog can be found 
online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 

For more information on the UNOHP 
or any of its publications, please contact the 
University of Nevada Oral History Program at 
Mail Stop 0324, University of Nevada, Reno, 
NV, 89557-0324 or by calling 775/784-6932. 

Alicia Barber 
Director, UNOHP 
July 2012 



Introduction 


Earl Gilson Reynolds, a native of Putnam 
County Ohio, brought his new bride, Anna 
Leona Kimmerle, to Currie, Nevada, in 
March of’ 1907. Currie, a railroad depot 
for the Nevada Northern, halfway between 
Cobre and Ely, or this side of nowhere, was 
the birthplace of’ Rodney J. Reynolds. The 
settlement — it can hardly be described 
as anything else — consisted of a one- 
room school house, a freight house, and 
a combination general store, post office, 
meeting place, saloon. There were also three 
homes, one of which was uninhabited. Six 
families lived in the surrounding area when 
on his mother’s birthday, July 31, 1912, 
Rodney Reynolds was born. 

He spent nine long, dry, dusty years 
in Currie enjoying his backyard which 
stretched out as far as the eye could see, the 
four burros which his father had bought 
from a bankrupt miner, and the occasional 
voyage to a lonely isolated cattle ranch. 
His parents knew there were no grand 
opportunities in Currie and that it was no 
place to raise a family. 


The Reynolds family moved to Elko, an 
incredibly large and bustling community of 
1,800 by the standards of Currie, in the fall of 
1921. Elko, then as now, was the county seat, 
division point for the Western Pacific, and 
the ranching center for Northern Nevada. 
His father opened a meat market, bought 
a house, and Rodney began his first real 
education at the new Elko Grammar School. 
With ten rooms and two hundred students 
ranging from grades one through eight, the 
new school was overwhelming to a youngster 
whose previous education had consisted of a 
one-room school house with the maximum 
number of students leveling off at eight. But 
Rodney gradually adapted to city life and 
became engrossed in the spirit of a small 
northern Nevada town. 

He finished his secondary education 
under the tutelage of the well known educator, 
Miss Knemyer, and was graduated from 
Elko County High School with a diploma in 
science. 

The rumblings of the depression had 
not yet been felt in Elko when Rodney left 



Rodney J. Reynolds 


xii 


home to attend the Carnegie Institute of 
Technology in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The 
depression had begun in Pittsburgh in 1930. 
Unemployed steel workers in toeless shoes 
selling government bought apples for 5$ a 
piece was a daily reality for him, not a myth 
of the newspapers. 

By this time the insipid tentacles of the 
depression had reached even as far as Elko. 
His father lost his business, and Rodney was 
forced to return home after only one year of 
college education, his only year. He repeats 
again and again in the dialog that follows how 
great the consequence of the depression was 
upon him, his future, his life. 

In the thirties Rodney held a multitude 
of short run jobs: tank truck diver, 
surveyor, procurement clerk for the Civilian 
Conservation Corps restoring Fort Churchill. 
As a young man he witnesses the revolution 
of American ideals in Roosevelts New Deal 
policies. And in the ensuing years this was 
to make as great an image upon him as the 
depression. 

He married Margaret Ellen Walker of 
Sparks in 1937, moved to Reno, and bought 
the Silver State Lodge, a motel built in the 
twenties for the divorce trade. The motel was 
located on old Highway 40 to San Francisco: 
it’s now West Fourth Street. He was to own 
and operate the Silver State Lodge for the next 
twenty-six years. 

World War II intervened in the forties, and, 
with a paramilitary position, Rodney worked 
as a flight dispatcher in the South Pacific on 
the now forgotten islands of Funafuti Wallis, 
and Canton for Pan American Airways. He 
returned to Reno in 1945 after the war. 

Approaching early middle age, his 
views on politics had been molded by the 
depression, the New Deal, and a world war. 
He established himself as a businessman and 
civic leader in Reno. He joined the Rotary 


Club, was membership chairman and later 
director of the Reno Chamber of Commerce, 
and was finally elected to the state assembly 
as a Republican in 1952. He was a cold war 
politician. 

Senator Joe McCarthy, the John Birch 
Society, the elusive communist threat, and 
those other fleeting, transparent organizations 
of thought all manifested themselves in his 
politics. In the 46th and 47th sessions of the 
legislature, education was the primary issue 
and the financing of education the greater 
part of that issue. Public spending, more 
taxes, a larger and increasingly complex 
bureaucracy would create strenuous conflicts 
with a conservative businessman from Reno. 
Nevada witnessed unprecedented growth and 
change in the fifties, and Rodney J. Reynolds 
was there. 

Bruce Walker Reynolds 
July, 1977 



A Cold War Politician 
of Nevada in the Fifties 


Bruce Walker Reynolds: Dad, lets start off with 
Elko in the thirties and your early political 
development. Who were some of the major 
political figures in Elko at that time? 

Rodney J. Reynolds: Well, I wasn’t very 
knowledgeable state-wise then, for I was 
eighteen years old. But my neighbor was John 
E. Robbins who had long been senator, state 
senator from Elko County, a close friend of 
mine. He was conscious of my inability to 
get a job during the depression, and, in fact, 
I approached him about it several times. One 
thing led to another, and he did finally land 
me a job in Reno with the State Park Service, 
emergency conservation work under one of 
Roosevelt’s original government spending 
programs. We had a CCC camp operating at 
Fort Churchill with the restoration of the old 
camp walls of the old fort there. I was hired as 
a procurement clerk there for the Reno office 
to buy all the merchandise, tools, and so forth 
for that camp. That was my introduction to 
government work. 


Was unemployment high in Nevada during 
the depression? 

Oh yes, tremendously so, particularly 
so in Elko County where the sheep men 
and cattle men had been so incredibly so 
hard hit. We had a couple of hard winters 
on top of it arid the railroads of Elko being 
the Western Pacific terminal, the Western 
Pacific was extremely hard hit not being a 
transcontinental railroad like the Southern 
Pacific it was hurt worse than most railroads. 
So, they curtailed operations greatly and 
many WP railroaders living in Elko were out 
of work. The competition was pretty tough 
for a young eighteen to twenty year old. 

What were these CCC camps like? 

Well, the CCC, Civilian Conservation 
Corps, the full term for them was a program 
envisioned in Washington, to bring the youth 
off the streets from the big cities: particularly 
out in the West, all over the country, but 



2 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


mainly in the West to give them a new 
insight in life, a little change of scenery It was 
patterned off the army operation, the army 
camps, with more lax, more lenient rules to 
live by But they received their board and 
room and lived in the camps much in army 
style. They wore khakis, army style clothes, 
and they were in groups of around two to 
three hundred that would constitute a camp 
There were many in Nevada. I just happened 
to be associated with the one at Fort Churchill. 
There were a couple operating out of Vegas and 
a couple operating out of Reno, and I think Ely 
and Elko to. But I was procurement clerk for 
the state park service and Fort Churchill had 
been declared a state park. They had petitioned 
for federal funds to rebuild and formalize the 
old ruins that were at Fort Churchill as a state 
park. And my job was a desk job working in 
an office which happened to be a spare office 
in the district highway offices of the Nevada 
State Highway Department because Robert 
Allen who was state highway engineer who 
was also head of the state park service at the 
time. The State Park Service being a nebulous 
thing in this state during those years; just 
getting started. It later became a more massive 
organization and had its own head, entirely 
separate from the highway department. But 
through that connection I then gravitated to 
the highway department. When Fort Churchill 
was completed in the fall, the CCC camp was 
closed because it was a winter it was a winter 
camp. It was strictly a summer camp. The boys 
were dispersed and sent other places; many 
of them, I guess, went home to school. The 
procurement office was shut down in Reno 
and I had to move on. And through Mr. Allen 
— he was very gracious and got me a job, and 
took me to work at the highway department, 
on the survey crews. Then followed four of 
five years where I worked for the highway 
department. 


Who was governor at the time of these CCC 
camps; wasn’t it Richard Kirman? 

Well, let’s see, the governor— Dick 
Kirman was governor. When I was at the 
highway department and I think he was 
governor during my term with the State Park 
Service. He was a Democrat, Robert Allen 
my good friend was a Democrat arid so 
was Jack Robbins in Elko. Jack Robbins was 
Democratic chairman for Elko County and a 
state Senator, so here I was a Republican from 
a Republican family making the most from a 
Democratic regime. But I enjoyed the work, 
and it was good for me to get away from home, 
away from the parents and out on my own 
since I couldn’t return to college. So it was 
good that I got into work in the government. 

How well did you know Judge Milton and Mrs. 
Gertrude Badt? In Elko at this time that is 

Well, Judge Badt was another politician, 
you might say, but in the judiciary rather than 
in the executive or legislative branches. He 
was serving as a private practicing attorney 
in Elko when I knew him. They lived across 
the street from my parents home where I 
lived-1 got to know them very well, through 
that relationship, I did much work in their 
yard shoveled snow for them in the winter, 
and that sort of thing. Mrs. Badt had been 
my teacher in high school. She had been my 
English teacher, before she was married to 
Judge Badt. Her name was Miss Nitze, a very 
excellent highly intelligent woman and an 
excellent teacher. I was very fond of her and 
I became very fond of Judge Badt too. 

Was Elko County at this time mostly Republican? 

Yes, Elko county was a Republican county 
per Se, though there was a strong Democratic 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


3 


implication through the county from the 
railroads; because they were labor union 
people. There was always a contest in the city 
of Elko between the Republicans and the 
Democrats. Most of the businessmen being 
Republicans and most of the labor people 
of course Democratic. County wide, I think, 
the Democrats were outnumbered. It was 
essentially county— but those agricultural 
counties are inclined to look at the man 
rather than the party. Jack Robbins was an 
excellent senator, he understood Nevada, he 
was born and reared in the state, loyal to it, 
and widely accepted as a Democrat. He was 
a conservative Democrat by the way. 

Were there any strikes in Elko at this time ? In 
other words was there organized labor ? 

There had been a severe strike at the WP 
Yards previous to the IWW days. It was pretty 
stringent with beatings and fist fights and so 
forth. But there were no labor problems there 
during the depression to speak of. It was no 
time to strike. The union knew they had no 
power, and industry was just shutting down, 
and there was nothing that could be done 
about it. It was a just a collapse of industry 
and employment both. It was a world wide 
phenomena at that time too. 

So you went on from working at the highway 
department to Reno in 1936. 

No, no I came to Reno with the state 
park job in 1934.1 had worked with the U.S. 
Geological survey right there at Elko for a 
couple of summers prior to that just part 
time work on the survey crew. But I came to 
Reno with the state park service and found 
perpetual employment thereafter the year 
round. Having up the idea of going back to 
school completely, I knew I had to work, so 


I came to Reno in ’34 and have worked here 
ever since you. might say. 

Bruce, I would like to make a few remarks 
about the depression because I am of an age 
where there are only a few of us left that went 
through the depression. The great depression 
of the thirties and it was an awesome thing— 
the world and this country had never 
seen anything like it— before wherein the 
government seemed to be sound, the money 
seemed to be sound and yet industry seemed 
to be shutting down, millionaires were 
becoming paupers, overnight through the loss 
of stock in the stock markets, the stock market 
had collapsed, the banks were closed. And it 
was truly an awesome time for a young man 
my age. It has left fixed impressions, some of 
course I will never forget, and I suppose it has 
molded my career and character considerably, 
because I was so stunned. With older people 
admitting that they had never seen anything 
like it before, prices were ridiculously low, I 
remember that eggs were five and ten cents 
a dozen, bread was five cents a loaf. I can 
remember my mother and my father getting 
together and trading one-half a ton of coal 
to a farmer for one half a side of pig. And my 
mother would take that pork, and cut it up, 
and make everything out of it that she could 
think of. There was considerable bartering 
going on it was truly an awesome time. Many, 
many young men would not get to college. If 
they didn’t have a college in their town I would 
say none did go off to college except a few of 
the people who had good jobs, that were able 
to carry through. Only their children got away 
to college, as cheap as college was, in these 
days. And it’s a fact that it tends to affect a 
persons life ever after, seeing such an awesome 
thing as that. Because I remember I had been 
in college in Pittsburgh Pennsylvania the 
winter before, to see those men in the streets 
peddling apples with the toes out of their 



4 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


shoes, in sub zero weather, selling the apples 
at five cents a piece.... I believe the city had 
bought and purchased the apples for them, 
and them to them, and we all ate apples out 
of charity, trying to help these people, it was 
truly an awesome sight. Pittsburgh was no 
place for a young man in 1930-31 I’ll tell you. 

Lets jump ahead a bit, with your working on the 
Nevada State Highway Department crew, you 
were on the construction crew of the highway 
from Winnemucca to McDermitt in 1938 is 
that correct? 

My first assignment was with the resident 
engineer, named A1 Kidding, whose folks 
had been close friends with my folks, whom 
I knew well. He had been with the highway 
department many years. I had been assigned 
to his survey crew on a construction job from 
Winnemucca to McDermitt, specifically, 
Paradise Hill to Orovada, which was under 
way at the moment. 

What was the road like before you worked on it? 

It was strictly a country road meandering 
through the sage brush trees and rocks. 
The highway department came along and 
straightened it out, and engineered it properly 
and put in the proper drainage. But it still 
continued to be a narrow two lane road by 
present standards. At first it was graveled with 
three quarter inch size gravel and then it was 
oiled, a few years later. This would be in the 
winter of 1933 or 1934. 

In 1938 you quit the highway department and 
you began work with the Soil Conservation 
Service; what did this consist of? 

Well, by this time I had been married 
to Margaret Walker of Sparks, and we were 


expecting our first baby, your older sister Pat. I 
knew the highway department had been good 
to me and I enjoyed the work tremendously. 
But the salary schedule at one hundred and 
twenty a month was not adequate to support 
a family. By this time the country was starting 
to come out of the depression, starting to 
stabilize, and industry was starting to liven 
up a bit. I thought I could do better on my 
own I could certainly make one hundred and 
twenty dollars a month. I quit the highway 
department, having been on the highway 
department five years. I thought I could run 
my own crew and the Soil Conservation 
Service was advertising for resident surveyors 
and civil engineers to do some soil studies 
in the Smith Valley area. I took a job with 
them knowing it would be only temporary 
and it only lasted about six months. But I 
ran a survey crew there for about six months 
making a topographic map and some other 
survey connections. 

You eventually moved to Reno in the fall of 
1938 and bought the Silver State Lodge. 

Yes, it was obvious to me as I spent my 
many hours along the highways of the state 
working for the highway department that 
the tourist business was picking up. My folks 
had gotten into a modest old camp ground 
operation in Elko. In visiting them I would 
notice the tourist influx. They were housing 
these tourists. I could see a potential for the 
tourist industry in the future, as cars picked 
up, as we were building these roads, building 
and improving them, that people would be 
able to travel easier, faster, cheaply and safely 
and there should be considerably more travel 
than we had ever seen in America in the 
west. I think I did have vision in that respect. 
Well, many others did too, and I felt I could 
take a chance as a young man on an opening 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


5 


of a motel or some business, catering to the 
tourist, and it seemed to me that the motel 
business was the best. So, I came to Reno and 
got into contact with my folks to see if I could 
get some financial help from them. They were 
digging out of the depression a bit by that time 
and through a family arrangement we did 
purchase what was known as the Silver State 
Lodge, 17901 West Fourth Street, in Reno. It 
was on the main road to San Francisco, which 
was one of the hottest tourist roads in the 
state. I was there twenty-five years and I did 
very well. It wound up rather disastrously, but 
your mother and I enjoyed many good years 
there. I worked awfully hard, many hours, it 
was very confining, but it was lucrative. 

Were most of the people staying therefrom the 
divorce trade or were they strictly tourists? 

Well, the institution we had bought had 
been aimed originally at the divorce trade in 
the late twenties and early thirties, because 
that had been one of Nevada’s key industries 
at the time. It was pushed strongly in the early 
years of the depression to compensate for 
the other losses. The Nevada legislature had 
instituted the six week residency for divorce 
which made it agreeable to people back east 
particularly New York and Philadelphia and 
the other big cities, to come to Reno. They did, 
and they started flocking here and there were 
many dude ranches and guest houses and 
even hotels aimed at this tourist trade. Both 
men and women came here for six weeks and 
moved on. The attorneys were all of course in 
the business. So the institution I had bought 
had been aimed at that period. But by the 
time I bought it in the fall of 1938 the tourist 
business, the transient tourist, had become 
more popular and prominent. This facet of 
the housing industry was sort of easing off a 
bit. The Silver State, which had been aimed at 


the divorce trade, with individual units and 
house keeping accommodations we converted 
into a motel. We more or less abolished the 
kitchens and converted them into bedrooms 
and we reoriented the thing into overnight 
transient accommodations. 

We have to jump quite a ways, skip World War 
11, and now I would like to talk about Reno 
in 1946, post World War IIyears, you were a 
member of the Reno Rotary Club at that time. 

I joined in 1946 when I came back from 
the war. 

Who were some of the leading members of the 
Rotary Club, the leading business men? 

Well, of course, the bankers are always 
considered the leading businessmen. Harold 
Gorman was a member of the club and I had 
known him, Forest Lovelock was one of our 
more prominent automobile dealers, Marsh 
Johnson was the Chevrolet dealer, Lovelock 
had the Ford dealership, members of the 
club, the Southworths, Southworth Tobacco 
Company, all of the old business hands of 
Reno who were popular downtown operators, 
belonged to Rotary and I was asked to join. I 
thought it was a fine thing to do, and I have 
always enjoyed it. 

Post World War II Reno politics: was Reno 
really the center of the political situation of 
the state? 

Yes, Vegas was getting started everybody 
could see that there was going to be a future 
in Las Vegas by virtue of the huge Basic 
Magnesium plant that had been out in 
Henderson, down there in World War II. 
With the completion, of course of Boulder 
Dam during the late thirties, and with the 



6 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


combination of these two, everybody could 
see that Vegas was going to be something. 
But as of yet, Vegas had not arrived and Reno 
was still definitely the political center of the 
state. The cow counties would furnish some 
of the opposition, but generally they were 
in harmony with Reno’s politics. Reno was 
a Republican community, it was the finance 
center of the state, the leading banks were 
centered here, most of the lawyers of the state 
were centered here, in Reno. The judicial 
system was centered here, of course Carson 
City the state capitol only thirty miles away 
had long made Reno prominent in politics. 

Who were some of the moneyed interests in 
Reno in the forties? 

Well, I think the Wingfields despite the 
fact that they had taken a terrible shellacking 
during the depression. 

How did this come about? 

Well, Wingfield owned most of the banks 
in Nevada. The Wingfield banks, there was 
a chain of them... He had one in practically 
every town of the state, they collapsed during 
the depression, not through poor banking 
particularly but through... but because 
banking at that time was not controlled as it 
is now. They loaned rather liberally to their 
friends, to business interests and when prices 
just collapsed, so severely they just collapsed 
with them. But they survived with some of 
their funds and they had gotten into a gold 
mine, the Getchell mine. Noble Getchell 
and George Wingfield were partners in the 
Getchell mine north of Winnemucca. They 
hit it rich there during the war and right 
afterward. Just before the war and during 
the war they made millions out of that mine. 
That was a peculiar mine. The mine started 


out as a gold strike, it was very lucrative and 
the war came on. Roosevelt shut down gold 
production, because they couldn’t afford 
the miners to be mining gold. They needed 
industrial metafiles and here along side of’ 
the gold deposit they had a tungsten deposit. 
They just switched their mill and it became 
a tungsten producer, during the war and 
after. They continued to make money. The 
Wingfields, George senior was in his—, 
an older man at this time. He owned the 
Riverside hotel and much other property. He 
was one of the leading elder statesman, one 
might say, of an older finance advisor for 
the state. His young son George had started 
following in his fathers footsteps, in managing 
the hotel. They were members of the Rotary 
Club and I knew young George very well, I 
knew the father slightly. 

From your knowledge at that time were they, 
so to speak kingmakers in the state of Nevada? 
Were they controlling politicians of any sort, or 
helping finance election campaigns? 

They were keenly interested in politics 
and political candidates, but I wouldn’t say 
they were controlling it. During the epic 
of the Wingfields demise, not death but 
retrenchment, another family... 

What is this that you are speaking of ? 

Well during the depression. Another 
personality had come to Reno who had 
married into the Chase Manhattan Bank of 
New York, named Norman Biltz. After a few 
years of endearing himself to the community 
and with the huge fortune behind him I would 
say that after the war Norman Biltz became 
the key political kingmaker of the state. I use 
that word reluctantly, because I knew Norman 
very well I had many, many meetings with 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


7 


him and almost got into business with him 
once. He was very discreet and subtle about 
it, but he did have tremendous, influence he 
was keenly interested in Nevada politics. He 
was a conservative and followed closely the 
Republican tenets. All in all, he was good for 
the community and good for the state. He 
helped me politically, I think, and I know he 
helped many other men. 

Were George Wingfield, Noble Getchell and 
finally Norman Biltz, were they working for or 
against Governor Vail Pittman? 

I think that they all tolerated Vail 
Pittman, he was a state personality here, he 
had a newspaper over in Ely prior to his 
governorship, and he was the brother of our 
famous senator Key Pittman. Key had long 
been a figure dominant in the politics of 
Nevada and although he was a Democrat, he 
was conservative...With the mining interests 
he espoused Nevada interests really well in 
Washington. He had been there so long, he 
had become president pro tern of the senate 
and had tremendous power in Washington. 
I think he approved of president Roosevelt... 
because of his position in the senate. So we 
had this Pittman family, a strong political 
hierarchy and I think the Wingfields and 
Biltz went along. Although the Wingfields 
were registered as Republicans and Biltz was 
a registered as a Democrat, it was possible that 
Norman was closer to the Pittmans, than were 
the Wingfields, who were ebbing off anyway 
in politics, George senior being an old man. I 
would say that George junior never quite filled 
the bill that his dad did. might add that I really 
truly believed that Norman Biltz was a little 
disappointed in Vail Pittman. He was not that 
astute, knowledgeable, polished politician 
that his brother Key was. I personally had a 
couple of run-ins with Vail Pittman. I found 


the man rather naive, bigoted, and extremely 
prejudiced. However he was a loyal Nevadan. 

When and where did these conversations with 
Vail Pittman take place? 

I don’t recall now what the issues were; 
I believe one had to do with public housing. 
I was in the housing business at the motel; 
we did much rental business in the winter 
time and with the tourists in the summer. 
Vail, I believe, was helping institute some 
public housing... No, that may not have been 
the issue. I was becoming prominent in the 
Reno Chamber of Commerce. This is right 
after WWII. I finally went to work with the 
Chamber of Commerce as a membership 
director even though I was still running the 
motel. I had a little extra time; I was stumping 
for a greater Reno Chamber of Commerce to 
really put Reno on the map. We had a thriving 
community and it needed some leadership, 
business-wise, and we felt that the Chamber 
of Commerce was the medium to do that. So 
many of QS joined together and upped our 
dues tenfold over what they had been in the 
past. We raised several thousand dollars. 

Who is we? 

Oh, the leading businessmen, the leading 
contractors, the power company, the bankers, 
and the hotel people. We all could see that 
Reno needed some leadership to give some 
advice to the city council, to give some help 
to the county commissioners, to help make 
decisions. There was no medium to which 
they could turn for committee studies, and 
the Chamber of Commerce took it upon 
themselves to make these studies of the future 
tourist business and what we should have and 
literally demanded...more hotels to house the 
people. We encouraged the power company 



8 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


to expand so that we could continue to have 
plenty of cheap power to let business expand, 
and I became prominent in that movement. 
Some of that fell counter to some of the state 
government concepts through Vail Pittman. 

Prior to WWII the Reno Chamber of Commerce 
was rather a weak or informal body? 

Prior to the war it had rather been a 
watchdog over railroad rates to see that we 
weren’t getting cheated on railroad rates, and 
we had a man who was a rate specialist, Ed 
Walker, a fine old gentleman and an expert 
in his field which was rate structures and 
that was important. But with the tourist 
business coming on our new highways 
and the aviation industry booming along, 
we needed a new airport, we needed some 
refinements in town that Ed Walker couldn’t 
handle. So we expanded the Chamber, 
hired a new manager who was an ex-airline 
operator. By the way Bill Brussard had been 
United Airlines agent in Reno and was very 
conscious of the tourist business. They got 
him to take the managership of the Chamber, 
and he in turn asked me to be his membership 
director. I helped them for a year. We naturally 
gravitated into political conflicts with the 
city, the county commissioners, and the state 
government because of some of the ideas we 
had. All in all it was an amicable thing; it was 
rapid growth, and there is always stress and 
strain in a situation like that. 

How influential was Pat McCarran in Reno 
at this time? 

Pat McCarran was the counterpart of 
Key Pittman. When Key Pittman passed 
out of the picture as an old man, and he 
was twenty years older than Pat McCarran, 
I think Pat McCarran filled the bill, and he 


became a power in Washington. Pat was 
considered a wild jackass in politics, and he 
went on a tangent. He was an individualist, 
he was a Catholic, he hated the communist- 
socialist movement, and he got himself 
deeply involved there. The Walter-McCarran 
Immigration Act was one of the results of his 
efforts in Washington, and it was a very fine 
piece of legislation in my opinion. He was also 
a member of the senate internal securities 
committee and lid some prominent work 
there investigating the communist ties you 
will recall right after the war with Russia. 

I think he was highly respected by the 
average citizen, though few knew him. He 
was not a man who spent much time on the 
street. He worked through his henchmen, 
his political colleagues, and lower echelon 
operators. 

We were talking about Senator Pat McCarran. 

Yes, I was saying I didn’t know Pat 
McCarran myself very well; although, I had 
met him myself on half a dozen occasions. 
He was not a man you would quietly sit down 
and visit hour after hour; he was a nervous 
type. He always had another meeting to 
go to or something else to do. But he was 
certainly a power in Washington. He gave 
Franklin Roosevelt a real bad time, and I 
personally approved of his philosophies, 
almost completely. He was a Democrat 
and I would find him slipping off into the 
Democratic machine quite often in order 
to enhance his next election, but once he 
was elected you could rest assured he was 
back on the conservative side and defending 
America and business and the farm people, 
the mining people, the ranching people. He 
was a good supporter and a real power in 
Washington. Nevada was lucky to have a man 
of that stature, and he was responsible for a 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


9 


few pieces of legislation that would ride in 
Washington for a few years to come. 

At this time we have a movement politically 
that was called the Young Turk Movement. 
What do you know of this and who were the 
major figures in the movement? 

This was a group of young people who 
had returned from the war and had ideas 
of their own; some of them were members 
of this Chamber of Commerce movement 
like I was. But it was felt that the Republican 
party had fallen into the hands of remnants of 
this Getchell-Wingfield clique and people of 
that type who were getting old. And we had 
a Democratic governor and a Democratic 
senator, Pat McCarran, and it was time that 
we got a Republican back in Washington, and 
Cliff Young became one of the Young Turks. 
He was a young lawyer in town. Les Gray who 
was basically a Democrat in my opinion, his 
family was, became a Republican though, and 
he was part of the Young Turk Movement. 
There were many fine people, but I never 
espoused to their philosophy too much. They 
were a little bit on the liberal side; they were 
young people; they were not business people; 
they were politicians and lawyers and people 
on the fringes of business. And I was never 
a definite part of the Young Turk Movement. 
While it had certain aspects that I did agree 
with, I didn’t fall in with them too much. 
I was in business and was associating with 
businessmen, and Nevada was growing in the 
business world. I wanted it to stay growing in 
a business way, not the socialist way. 

So, are you tying the Young Turk Movement 
to socialism? 

Somewhat. It was never openly revealed to 
be that, but I think many of the key figures in 


the Young Turk Movement were pretty liberal 
in their philosophy, if the truth were known. 

Liberal in what sense in Reno in 1950? 

In that they were welfare orientated and 
felt that the income tax would be probably 
a good thing. They were for more public 
spending on the public education system. 
They were espousing federal help which the 
country was starting to become accustomed 
to, and, instead of trying to shut it off after the 
war like most of us Republican businessmen 
were trying to do, they wanted to extend it 
and to continue it. Many of those emergency 
programs during the depression and during 
the war years when we were a nation at war 
had been temporary pieces of legislation given 
to the congress and to the president. We felt 
that the war was over and it was time to shut 
these off and abolish them, but the Young 
Turk Movement was for a continuation of 
them. And this was where I parted with them 
mainly. 

Who was their leader? 

Well, I wouldn’t say that it was one 
individual. There were the Young Democrats 
in the Democratic party, so they felt there 
should be the Young Republicans in the 
Republican party; I’ve named two, Cliff Young 
and Les Gray. There were many others... 
Several attorneys... Les Fry... People who are 
still present in Reno... Good people... I don’t 
say they weren’t good people... Just that they 
were of that philosophy, liberal philosophy. 

So in 1952 we see your entry into politics, the 
legislative race. 

This was an outgrowth of my Chamber 
of Commerce associations and the Rotary 



10 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


Club and the Motel Association. I had 
become prominent in the motel business in 
the state and having been a local president, 
state president, and finally a director of the 
National Motel Association — on the board 
of governors — and, since our state was so 
tourist orientated, it was natural that a man 
deeply involved in the tourist industry would 
gravitate toward the legislature to support 
things that were conducive to the tourist 
industry Then I found much strong support 
for my candidacy 

Who were some of’ the other candidates that 
you ran against in the legislative race of 1952? 

There were many young men around 
town. The Nevada State Legislature seems to 
attract young men. The older businessmen 
are too busy to serve, so they encourage 
young businessmen in the Republican party. 
I think we had a slate of eight Republicans 
each time. Eight Republicans run against eight 
Democrats and that was the general election 
race. You want the name of’ some of the other 
Democrats? 

Or Republicans. 

I would be hard put to remember those 
who were not elected. 

How well did you know figures such as Leslie 
Lerude? 

Leslie Lerude was a registered Republican 
although he had been a labor union organizer 
in his younger days. He ran a restaurant 
in town, the Wigwam Coffee Shop which 
became a famous little restaurant in Reno. I 
got to know him very well; he was elected the 
same time I was. I think the second time also. 
He and I got along very well until we came 


to some labor legislation that I would oppose 
him on. 

How about Herbert L. Covington? 

Covington was a labor man, a Democrat 
from Sparks, and he and I were about 180 
degrees apart at all times. 

How about Clarence Ruedy? 

Clarence Ruedy was a fellow Republican, a 
fine old gentleman, much older. He had been 
in the legislature previously and was quite 
knowledgeable. He was a good conservative 
Republican, arid it was a pleasure to work with 
him. 

What were some of the issues at this time? The 
major issues that candidates were running on 
in 1952? 

Now we are talking about 1953, and, 
up to this time, here, we had been through 
the depression and through the war. We 
still had on the books in Nevada very little 
new legislation to counter, help, or offset the 
rapid growth we were having. It was obvious 
to everybody that some major changes 
were going to have to be made in the state 
government and the laws of the state in order 
to accommodate this rapid growth. First the 
growth was exceeding the tax structure. The 
growth always moves in before the tax base 
comes up; it takes several years for the tax 
base to reflect rapid growth. The property tax 
was not able to carry the necessary burden 
of state government, so they had to turn to 
gambling. Well, gambling prior to the war 
had not been such a great thing in the state, 
and the entertainment angle of gambling 
had not been here at all. So following the 
war there were a couple of new hotels going 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


11 


up in Vegas, and Vegas was starting to 
show its head. Now in Reno we had nearly 
more people than we had slot machines 
and tables to accommodate them, so they 
started to tax gambling, to modify the rules 
and regulations, to make it easier to open a 
gaming establishment. This put considerable 
burden on the city councils and the county 
commissioners to police and organize the 
areas in which gambling would be held. So 
the state was constantly upping the gambling 
tax. And it appeared to me and many others 
that it might be possible to overtax gambling 
to where you turned to cheating to make 
money, and we didn’t want that to occur. 
So even the businessmen felt there was a 
need for a new tax. I never felt that there 
was a need for a new tax because there was 
plenty of money coming in if the state didn’t 
get into welfare. But by the state taking over 
the historic chores of the county and cities 
and putting it on a state basis then the state 
fell way short of the funds to finance the 
statewide welfare program. 

How were they taxing gambling prior to 1953? 

Each slot machine had a tax, and each 
table had a tax. It was in increments and it 
changed every time the legislature met, by the 
way. But it was a modest tax, and it got up to 
about 2% of the gross, then 4% of the gross, 
6% of the gross income, and so on. And it was 
producing 5 million dollars, 7 million dollars, 
12 million dollars. Today its producing over a 
hundred million, I guess. Ah, and I thought 
there was enough money to carry the state 
if they’d stay out of welfare. Stopping these 
great welfare spending programs was a full 
time job. In fact, they couldn’t be stopped 
and they weren’t stopped because they were 
participating programs with federal money. 
Everybody took the position you’re denying 


the state their share of the federal funds if 
you don’t institute the program. Because it’s 
50% federally funded or 60% or 75%, some 
of them were totally federally funded. But 
you had. to set up a state organization to 
do it. The state bureaucracy... My general 
philosophy was to fight this all the way. 
This was socialism, the kind which I felt the 
communists were pushing hard. The thing 
was a matter of some kind of compromise. 
Then to top off that, the school system was 
getting bogged down. We had the old original 
school plants, and this phenomenal growth 
was taking place. After the war, the baby 
bulge was a tremendous thing, and we just 
had to have new school buildings, new school 
facilities, new school books. It was a terrible 
drain on the state, the counties and the cities. 
Because the cities and the counties and the 
school districts had historically shared in the 
$5.00 constitutional limit of our state. And by 
the schools demanding more and more the 
cities had to have more, the counties had to 
have more; their problems were increasing 
the same. So the feeling was in the state that 
the schools needed some state support far 
beyond anything they’d ever had in the past. 
And I agreed with that. My disagreement 
was that there wasn’t money enough to do it 
without new taxes. Here we were facing a new 
tax burden, sales tax or a new income tax or 
a new franchise tax of some kind or a much 
heavier tax on gambling. And the feeling was, 
if you taxed gambling too heavily you’d be so 
dependent upon gambling that the gamblers 
could call the politics; all the industry in the 
state would be at the mercy of gambling; 
and nobody wanted that. So the idea was 
to put the brakes on gambling tax a little bit 
and institute a new tax on the people. And 
herein is where the problems started in the 
1953 session, and they went on and they’re 
still going on. 



12 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


At this time, in the 1953 legislature, your leader 
was Governor Russell, a Republican. What 
was your relationship with him and how did 
he affect the assembly ? 

The fact that Governor Russell was a 
Republican was of a great help to me and all 
the other Republicans from Washoe County. 
Appreciate that the entire delegation from 
Washoe County was Republican... Except 
for one, I believe... A Democrat from Sparks. 
Whereas the Clark County delegation was 
essentially Democratic with one or two 
Republicans. And around the state it was 
pretty much Republican except from Ely, 
the mining town, there was a Democrat. 
So we had a majority of Republicans in the 
legislature in ’53 if I recall correctly. No, 
we did not have a majority... I can’t recall 
correctly. The senate was solid Republican, 
not solid but a majority of Republicans pretty 
consistently and had been for years. But we 
did have a good number of Republicans. We 
never were in a majority in the assembly; we 
were always a minority party. But Governor 
Russell strengthened our hand tremendously. 
And I know on several occasions he asked 
me to introduce some legislation for him. He 
and I had a good relationship. Except for one 
particular bill which came up I think in the 
’56 or ’57 or ’55 session, I guess it was... the 
aid to dependent children. 

But getting back to this full growth, I think 
in 1953 we appropriated a considerable sum 
of money to hire the Peabody Institute which 
was a school research organization... back East 
I believe ... known as the Peabody Group to 
make a study of what we should do in the state 
of Nevada education-wise in order to funnel 
more state funds into the school districts. 
Prior to this, each little school district was 
represented by its own school board elected 
amongst the people whose children went to 


school. I remember Jiggs out of Elko, a little 
community with only seven or eight children 
who went to school. I had good friends 
who were on the school board who literally 
knew nothing. They were uneducated men 
themselves. They admitted they shouldn’t be 
serving on the school board, but there was no 
one else to serve. Their main problem was to 
hire one teacher. If they got her hired, they 
figured their main chores were done. This 
sort of thing was becoming pretty archaic. 
Plus Vegas and Reno’s school districts were 
becoming huge and out of hand. The system 
was wrong. So, I think in the next session 
then the Peabody people reported back with 
the Peabody Report. And they recommended 
county consolidation... that of the seventeen 
counties in Nevada there could be seventeen 
school districts with one or two exceptions. 
Eureka and Lander counties were pretty 
small counties; Esmeralda hardly had enough 
people to make a county. So I think it was 
consolidated with Nye and we had sixteen 
school districts... all at the county level 
except for that one combination. This is what 
they recommended. Then to do that there 
was a certain amount of money that would 
have to be appropriated at the state level to 
assist these school districts and help them 
get started and help them build buildings 
because they wanted to bring up the standards 
of the county schools to some decency and a 
comparable level to the city schools. The cities 
had to have some huge new buildings, high 
schools particularly, and it was going to take 
a lot of money. I-low would you proportion 
it among the various students and the various 
school districts of the counties of the state? 
This became the problem. So they came up 
with taking into consideration the average 
daily attendance of the schools. Each teacher/ 
pupil ratio would be paid so much. So if you 
had a country school with only eight students 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


13 


and one teacher... whereas Reno or Las Vegas 
with a school of 2,000 in a high school and 
fifty teachers ... youd have a formula there. 
So we came up with the ADA, average daily 
attendance formula. 

Who were the originators of this? 

This was the Peabody Report. I think it 
was modified somewhat. The Peabody had 
made a study I believe in Utah and Idaho, and 
we talked to some of their legislators and their 
school people and checked on what Peabody 
was reporting to us. The Peabody people were 
very efficient and there was good research. 
The outgrowth was that we all pretty much 
went along with it. 

Whose idea was it to bring in this organization? 

I think we started first thing in the ’53 
legislature; we appropriated some money to 
get that started. In a legislative action you 
never know who the individual is or if there 
is an individual. You get down to have lunch 
in a restaurant sometime with four or five 
fellas, and they say well let’s get together and 
do this. Four or five go back to the legislature 
and draw up a bill. Well, no one man did 
but four or five did. But we had a couple of 
educators in the legislature; I had two or three 
children coming along in school; I was close 
to the schools. I talked to our Superintendent 
of Public Instruction here, Earl Wooster; I 
had many meeting with him at length. And 
we talked over many of these things; so did 
many of the other legislators. And our Reno 
delegation, I think, did a commendable 
job. We took to the legislature many good, 
worthwhile concepts. We picked up from our 
experience working with our school people 
here, because, after all, Reno had one of the 
larger school districts in the state. 


Were there any significant lobbyists at this time 
for changing the educational system in Nevada? 

Oh yes, yes, there were many. This wasn’t 
unique to Nevada; this was going on in 
many other states. The National Education 
Association, the national association for the 
teachers, had lobbyists here. We were heavily 
lobbied at the Nevada legislature by out of state 
lobbyists ... national organizations, national 
textbook people, national bureaucrats from 
Washington in the federal school system, and 
we had the Catholic church school system 
and the Mormon church school system, and 
the many sects in long operated schools. 
These people were here from all over the 
Western states and back East too. We asked 
for them, we wanted them. We wanted 
information; we didn’t want to make a mistake. 
It was a comprehensive and massive piece of 
legislation because it was going to take forty or 
fifty bills, separate bills to be introduced and 
passed to make the thing work, to proportion 
the money, to select the auditors, the funding 
of the thing through the controller’s office, 
the legislative council bureau’s drafting and 
working of the bills. It was a tremendous 
job. And it took much time. It was not all 
ironed out. Immediately after the ’53 session, 
Governor Russell had to call a special ’54 
session to iron out some of our mistakes and 
shortcomings of the ’53 session. A couple 
voids appeared. We hadn’t tackled it all. 

It seems that the biggest problem with this 
education bill was financing — whether 
gambling tax, property tax, sales tax, or state 
income tax. Who were the proponents and 
what were the problems with these taxes? 

This is the frosting on the cake, of course. 
The school system we envisioned could not 
be instituted without state money, and the 



14 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


state did not have the money in its coffers or 
any way of acquiring it under the present tax 
structure, So a whole new tax approach had 
to be made. I recall or felt that welfare would 
have to take a deep shellacking for a while in 
order to furnish money for the schools. Then 
later when we built up the treasury, welfare 
could get back in the picture. But I think I 
was alone in that field; nobody else would go 
along with that concept. Generally the outside 
lobbyists were pushing a new tax. I think even 
the businessmen recognized and realized we 
couldn’t continue in the tax base we had in 
the past. And they were starting to cave in and 
allow the thinking of a new tax. So up jumped 
the income tax because that was so popular 
at the federal level and many other states. A 
state income tax had long been an anathema 
to Nevada because our haven for the wealthy 
who were here, who had been here, and who 
had made our state the excellent place to 
live that it had been. Everybody wanted to 
protect that facet. We did not like an income 
tax. Even the Democrats were not too fond of 
it, particularly the conservative Democrats. 
So, the income tax looked like it would have 
a rough go, so then came the sales tax. Well, 
the sales tax is known to be a regressive tax; 
every time you sell something you have to add 
more on. Ultimately a product might get hurt 
because the tax on it would be so high. So a 
tax, a sales tax, was tossed around. It wasn’t 
easy to come by. But in order to finance the 
school system, to spend a lot of money on the 
Peabody Report ... the Peabody Report was 
in. Everybody was pretty well decided that 
the Peabody Report would be adopted. There 
was a crush to finance it. In came the bills. 
There were many types of sales tax — taxing 
on food, not taxing food, taxing utilities like 
home utilities like fuel oil and electricity, not 
taxing that, taxing automobiles heavily and 
liquor extremely heavily, cigarettes heavier 


yet, making it very modest on food and all of 
these various facets made it tough. 

So at this time we’re talking about taxes. Now 
Norman Biltz was a large financier of Nevada, 
and men like Charlie Mapes or Bill Harrah 
had great interests. What sort of tax were they 
interested in or agreeable to? 

Those were the very people starting a 
response or starting to be agreeable to the 
sales tax. Now the theory of the sales tax 
is that it reaches everybody, the poor man 
and the little man as well as the wealthy. The 
wealthy man, of course, wants to distribute 
the tax base as widely as possible in order for 
him to avoid paying an undo share. This part 
is fine. I was agreeable to that aspect, but the 
aspect I didn’t like is that particularly for the 
middle class, the small man, the sales tax is 
not deductible from his federal income tax 
because he doesn’t keep receipts. A person 
goes out and buys an automobile and pays 
$200 sales tax on the purchase of a domestic 
car not a business car but just for his private 
use. He has no way of getting that deduction 
out of his income tax for federal purposes. 
And here we’re putting a huge tax load on the 
people of the state without them benefiting 
from the deductions. A man of business buys 
a bunch of wire for a home he’s building for 
someone; he just adds it to the cost of the 
wire, and it is a deductible expense, but the 
little man gets hooked on that even though the 
federal government allows a little deduction. 
It doesn’t allow enough. 

What were your constituents asking for? What 
were they agreeable to? 

The labor people hate and despise the sales 
tax because they’re aware of the fact it taxes 
the laboring man. It taxes everything they 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


15 


buy, and they’re trying to protect the little 
people. Their idea is to soak the rich. The rich 
man’s idea is not to soak the little man, but to 
distribute it widely. So that where you have 
the two sides of the coin. 

What were your constituents asking for? 

I was sort of in the middle on the thing 
except that while I despise the income tax, 
particularly the progressive income tax, I 
despise it vehemently, I was aware of the fact 
that the federal government was taking out 
of the state of Nevada through its income tax 
about $500,000,000 at that time. This is what 
the internal revenue service was collecting 
and sending to Washington. It occurred 
to me that we don’t need a new tax of any 
kind. What we need to do is to divert part 
of this money that’s going to Washington 
back to Nevada. I said if we could tax the 
government’s collection we’d have something. 
So I started looking around. I didn’t like the 
sales tax. As I say, it’s a regressive tax; it hurts 
everybody and you don’t get the benefit of 
the deduction. I didn’t really feel we needed 
a tax despite the fact that school people 
were hollering for new money. I saw this 
tremendous income from gambling. I saw 
this tremendous outgo on welfare which I’m 
bitterly opposed to. 

What were the local people feeling, the people 
in Reno? Were they for a new tax? What were 
their feelings? How did your constituents feel? 

How do you know? How do you know 
what your constituents think? You know 
one man, you know another man, you know 
what those two think. There’s no way of 
judging what your constituents think. They 
think largely about what they read in the 
newspapers. 


What were the newspapers propounding? 

The newspapers are liberal. They’ve always 
been liberal. They always will be liberal until 
something changes. So anything in the form 
of socialism the newspapers support. 

In Nevada in 1952? 

Yes, they were supporting an income tax. 
But when the sales tax seemed to be getting 
strong impetus, they even went along with the 
sales tax. The point was, they were supporting 
a new tax. And here I am dedicated to the 
prohibition of any new tax. But, if there must 
be a tax, I felt that we should short circuit the 
tax that was already here, the federal income 
tax. I stumbled across the so-called Alaska 
Plan. It was the state income tax instituted in 
Alaska. And we arrived at this concept. 

Who is we? 

Myself and the people I was working with 
getting this together, a few constituents who 
believed like I did. 

Who were they? 

Ah, Tom Kean, I think, was working 
pretty much on that... well, actually, some 
old internal revenue people who had retired 
... I can’t remember the man’s name now who 
had been giving me the information. Anyway, 
I’ll take responsibility on it, for it was my 
idea, and I was pushing it. If we could short 
circuit this federal money through the state 
income tax, we’d have something. So, I said 
we’ll institute a state income tax based on 
the Alaska Plan which is ten percent of what 
the federal government collects. You figure 
up your federal income tax as if there were 
no state tax, and, if it comes to $600 you owe 



16 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


the government, you take ten percent of $60 
and you pay that to the state first. Then you 
deduct that $60 from your taxable income at 
the federal level and you reduce it not the full 
$60 but you might reduce it $50. So then only 
$10 would go to the federal government and 
$50 would go to the state government. And 
the individual would only have to pay $10 
more. He pays $70 total tax instead of $60. 
So it wouldn’t hurt the individual too much. 

Would you elaborate upon the Alaska Plan? 

The Alaska Plan is an income tax 
proportioned upon the federal income tax. 
We had the bill drafter write to Alaska and 
get a copy of it. I simply introduced that. I 
think we changed the rate of taxation a bit 
to ten percent, as I recall, to raise the so- 
called fifty million dollars that Nevada was 
reportedly short. They were short because 
of the extensive welfare program build-ups. 
The Alaska Plan was an income tax wherein 
you computed the federal tax and then took 
a percentage of it for the state tax, entered 
that, and recomputed your federal tax with 
that state deduction. 

Well, the principle was that particularly 
those in the higher tax bracket... the deduction 
to the state was substantial so that their federal 
income tax wasn’t so high. Again I say I was 
trying to short circuit some of the federal 
money that was being drained out of the state. 
We estimated that to be about $500,000,000 a 
year in those years. I didn’t like an income tax, 
I didn’t want an income tax. But it was a way 
to counter any other type tax. I knew that an 
income tax could not possibly be put through 
the legislature. It was a rather malicious and 
facetious move on my part in that I introduced 
it as rather a political interworking situation 
wherein I knew it couldn’t pass, yet I was going 
to support it. Supporting my own tax I wasn’t 


obligated to vote for anyone else’s tax. That’s 
really what it amounts to. 

Who were the opponents to this tax? 

The business community at large and the 
Republican party as a whole were opposed to 
any form of income tax because the absence 
of an income tax was what Nevada was 
advertising and what was attracting wealth. 
That together with no tax upon intangibles 
such as stocks and bonds and annuities made 
Nevada relatively tax free for the relatively 
wealthy. This was a great attraction to our state 
and was bringing in a considerable number 
of high caliber people who we did want. An 
income tax would tend to alienate them. 
The opposition, of course, we knew would 
be a sales tax that the labor people and the 
Democrats and the liberals were opposing so 
bad. The business community wanted a sales 
tax. The liberal-labor community wanted an 
income tax, and it put me in the awkward 
position of seeming to be on the side of the 
labor group and here I was openly opposed 
to that segment of our legislature. But it 
backfired on me in that when I ran the third 
time everyone thought I was advocating an 
income tax, and it probably hurt me politically 
because my own constituency was sales tax 
oriented. But I felt in my heart we didn’t need 
any kind of tax. The way to raise money was 
to knock off the welfare spending of the state 
because our tax base on the ad valorem tax 
plus the gambling tax was all the money we 
needed to run a state government. 

James “Sailor” Ryan, the labor leader at that 
time, wanted an increase in gambling tax. How 
did you feel about this? 

Yes “Sailor” Ryan was a very vociferous 
and noisy character from Las Vegas ... being 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


17 


a labor union organizer and leader and was 
pretty high up in the labor hierarchy... He 
was very pro income tax and wanted to tax 
the gambling interests too. He was not in 
love with gambling although he recognized 
what they were doing for the state because 
at that time the gaming industry was not 
organized. They were trying to organize it 
even in those days. He was pretty mad at 
the gaining industry and was for taxing the 
heck out of them. The rest of us knew that 
if we taxed gaining too heavily we could 
hurt it, drive it underground, or drive it 
into crooked manipulations and cheating, 
and we didn’t want to do that. Legitimate 
gamblers in the state were quite willing to 
pay a reasonable tax, but they couldn’t afford 
an excessive tax more than anybody else 
could. 

Did the casino owners and gamblers have a 
large influence in Carson City at this time, a 
large lobby group, that is? 

No, not really. The gaming industry in 
Nevada at that time was a pretty up and up, 
honest, sincere, and decent group of people. 
They were dominated by the Reno interests 
considerably though there were two or three 
casinos in Vegas. 

Who were the Reno interests? 

The Reno interests were Raymond I. 
Smith from Harold’s Club, Bill Harrah from 
Harrah’s Club, and there were some smaller 
casinos at the time. The Palace Club, the Bank 
Club, which was coming to an end, but they 
were pretty decent and respectable people as 
a whole. 

Certainly they must have had some lobby 
groups in Carson City. 


They had lobbyists there, yes. They 
had an association and the secretary of the 
association was there constantly. But they 
didn’t have a great vote. They had money 
behind them, but they didn’t exercise it 
wildly. They didn’t interfere in politics too 
much as long as politics were such that 
they could exist and politics wasn’t causing 
them any trouble. All businessmen in the 
state recognized what gambling was doing 
for Nevada. We were so thankful to have 
gaming income as well as other income 
that it had wide support. They didn’t have 
to have a potent lobby group, but they were 
there for information purposes because 
the gambling industry is an intricate and 
sophisticated industry that the average man 
knows nothing about. And certainly as an 
assemblyman I wasn’t knowledgeable about 
the inner workings of gambling and how 
much tax it could bare. Although, after four 
years I did know a good deal about it. During 
one of our sessions, I forget which one it 
was now, the Las Vegas interests invited the 
entire legislature down there for what we 
called a lost weekend... all on the house. We 
went down on a National Guard airplane as I 
recall. The governor went with us. The entire 
legislature went, I think, plus the press corps. 
We stayed two or three days in the hotels and 
had all our board and room and plenty to 
drink, free. It was an informative weekend. 
We met all the owners of’ the gaining 
businesses there, and they took us around 
and showed us in the daytime a few of the 
outlying communities such as Henderson 
... and what was happening there since the 
war and the conversion of Henderson into 
private industry. It was most informative. 
I came back more knowledgeable about it, 
despite the fact that at times it was a kind 
of wild party, particularly the night sessions 
with free entertainment. 



18 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


Governor Charles Russell called a special 
session in 1954, the first special session in 
twenty-seven years. The reason for this was 
financing education. What happened during 
that special session? 

I can’t recall to any great extent exactly what 
the problems were. They were ramifications of 
oversights in our original legislation the year 
before with the Peabody formula trying to be 
adopted, and there were a couple of voids that 
showed up that made it totally unworkable. 
It had to do with the disbursement of the 
various funds to the various schools on the 
basis of student enrollment plus the teachers. 
As I recall we mishandled the teacher 
situation. We had to take into consideration 
the number of students enrolled plus the 
teachers. As I recall this was the number of 
students in daily attendance plus the number 
of teachers that had to be on hand to take 
care of that. And if the teachers were on duty 
and the children didn’t show, you still had 
to pay the teachers. So we had to modify 
the disbursement formula a little bit to take 
care of that. In a small school with say only 
three teachers — and it was expected that all 
three teachers would be needed there and 
yet perhaps one of the entire classes didn’t 
show up that day — you still had to pay that 
teacher because you called her. And this 
happens quite often when there’s an epidemic 
or disease situation. Unquestionably we’re 
trying to balance out the class/teacher ratio, 
so we don’t have huge classes with only one 
teacher and then one teacher with only a few 
students. We were trying to balance it out 
with only twenty-five to thirty students per 
day for each teacher, as I recall. There were 
two or three things like that that necessitated 
a special session, Furthermore, the funds 
that we had created to finance the schooling 
were going to be delayed six months to nine 


months, as I recall. Property tax valuations 
are always a year late. You collect in one year 
the assessments that were set up the previous 
year. They’re always late coming in. And to 
institute a new expenditure that is effective 
immediately, you must remember that the 
taxes to pay for it are going to be a year late. 
I think we had to make some special general 
fund disbursements in that special session. 

Nevada was witnessing an incredible growth 
rate at this time. 

Yes, they were. I recall at this time we 
were getting this postwar baby boom. It 
was coming out in the lower grades of the 
grade schools; it hadn’t hit the high schools 
or colleges yet, but we knew it was coming 
soon. It was kind of like watching an ostrich 
swallow a coconut. You could see it start 
down its throat, and little by little it went 
on down until it got to the body. The young 
body at that time was the university. At this 
time classroom space and teachers for the 
primary grades were real critical, because of 
this postwar baby boom which was about an 
eight to ten year extension. And you could 
just see that group of babies move through 
the school system. 

How well .informed was the average 
assemblyman at this time as far as taxes 
go? Did you have tax experts come in and 
help you understand the situation or was it 
strictly original research by the assemblymen 
themselves? 

Well, there was a small nucleus of 
assemblymen that did delve into the 
educational programs of the country and 
in various other states, but none of us were 
experts on it, We did have many experts who 
were there from universities, and I think 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


19 


the education lobby itself which is always a 
potent lobby The average legislator cannot 
be knowledgeable in everything. And if it 
weren’t for professional lobbyists and experts 
in their particular field no legislation in this 
state could possibly function. I do entirely 
approve of the facts and figures that dedicated 
and detailed experts are able to furnish to a 
legislature. 

The March 6, 1953 Territorial Enterprise says 
about the state income tax, “It was childish 
legislation proposed in the lower house and 
aimed at placating the state’s most arrogant 
yet completely expendable minority pressure 
group, the school block.”Now this is an extreme 
view. How did you feel about this school block? 
Did you think they were positive in asking for 
their reasons? 

Yes. The school block is a very potent 
group because they do represent literally 
everybody in the state; they represent every 
child; they represent every parent, they’d like 
to claim. They represent all the teachers. In 
fact, they represent the general population, 
but the leaders of these school groups are 
thinking their own thoughts. They have 
no more way of judging what the general 
population thinks than does a legislator or 
any other individual man. But they take the 
position that they do know; and, therefore, 
they are arrogant, positive, and vociferous. 
They’re there constantly, and they seem to 
be well financed. I have long looked with a 
jaundiced eye upon some of the legislative 
lobbying groups from education. 

What are some of your personal recollections of 
members of the assembly at that time? 

That is a matter of opinion. I don’t suppose 
any two men in the legislature would agree 


completely upon the type of people their fellow 
legislators are or were, but the legislature, the 
assembly at least, was a broad cross section of 
our society, and it’s probably well it was that. 
How some of the men got elected I will never 
know. We had two that literally could not read 
or write beyond sign their own name and read 
the amounts on their paycheck. They could not 
read the bills; they could not understand the 
words; and to my knowledge they could not 
make a speech to explain their own position. 
Not that they were bad sort of fellas. We were 
all so sympathetic to them that we all kind 
of went along with them. Many hours were 
spent explaining things to these men. On the 
other hand, there were various astute people 
in the assembly, lawyers and businessmen who 
were well educated and highly informed. The 
legislature as a whole is not a very aristocratic 
group of people. They are famous in their 
own community for some specific reason ... 
maybe one became famous because he married 
somebody’s daughter that was prominent 
therefore he could be elected. But, by in large, 
I was extremely disappointed with the caliber 
of people in the legislature. Knowing that I was 
not well qualified myself, I felt that certainly I 
would be at the bottom of the list and everybody 
else there would be more knowledgeable than I 
was, but I was in for a rude awakening. I found 
myself perhaps in the so-called upper group, 
but the average legislator is a disappointment I 
think to the public, but who knows. You don’t 
know what a man is until after he’s in office 
and he starts to perform, and the legislature 
is no exception. I found it disconcerting to 
be there with people who were so bigoted, 
such hypocrites, such a lack of intelligence 
and education particularly — not that that’s 
everybody. We had a few very good men. 

Were some of the proposals passed by the 
backroom method, by working through political 




20 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


hacks and so forth, working with special interest 
outside of the assembly itself? Did members get 
together and decide they would pass this bill for 
special reasons? 

Well, yes. There are always special interests, 
and certain special interests maintained their 
man in the legislature at all times. It’s long 
been known that there are railroad interests, 
and the railroad did go to no end of trouble 
to see that at least a few in the legislature 
were definitely pro-railroad, whether they 
were Democrats or Republicans was of no 
importance. There was always a railroad lobby 
there. And the labor group, of course, always 
had several strong pro-labor men, openly 
pro-labor, labor leaders, labor organizers, 
and a powerful lobby working with them. 
There were backroom manipulations in each 
of those groups, and they would come forth 
with a bill that the members would know 
nothing about until it hit the floor. Sometimes 
they would try to whiz them through without 
adequate study. Generally they were slowed 
down. A pretty good look was taken. But 
many times the bills did get through because 
many members did not understand them. If a 
fellow Democrat did not understand a bill one 
of his colleagues had introduced, he’d go along 
with him anyway whether he understood it or 
not simply because of the politics of the thing. 
This is one of the crimes of the legislative 
process really. Such a wide disparity and such 
a wide field of bills introduced, six hundred 
or eight hundred introductions all the way 
from angleworms and fishing worms to air 
space for aircraft. There is just no end to all 
the problems that face society, and they’re all 
introduced in the legislature sooner or later. 

As a motel owner and assemblyman at one 
point you attacked the Reno City Council on the 
housing issue. They were trying to build public 


housing in 1953. What are your recollections 
of this event? 

I believe my involvement in that particular 
hassle in the city of Reno was responsible 
for my running for the legislature. It was 
probably responsible for my being elected to 
the legislature. Most of this public housing and 
urban renewal and housing for the indigents 
and downtrodden was emanating from 
Washington. The local people did not want it. 
We had people here with much rental property, 
and this cheap rental housing financed by the 
federal government participated in by the state 
in a minor way would tend to wreck the rent 
structure. That’s exactly the way I felt about it 
... and that Reno was well able to take care of 
its own housing problems. Private industry 
would provide the housing when there was 
an opportunity to make a profit. It didn’t really 
matter if they were cheap cabins or exclusive 
castles; industry will provide what the demand 
demands. It may be a few years late getting 
caught up, and sometimes there’s a little over 
building, but to have the federal government 
interfere just because somebody in Washington 
felt there must be some people in Reno who 
weren’t well housed was an anathema to most 
of us. It certainly was to me. The city council 
seemed to be taking the position they ought 
to be getting this federal money in to Reno 
no matter what happened. The whole thing 
was ridiculous in my book, still is. I think this 
was largely responsible for my being elected 
because I campaigned on that issue pretty 
strongly in all three of my runnings. 

At this time Nevada was, in a sense, sticking 
up for states’ rights vs. the huge federal 
bureaucracy. At this time in 1953 did the 
average assemblyman and the average citizen 
feel that the federal government was growing 
at too fast of a rate and too large? 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


21 


Yes, definitely. The average man on 
the street was convinced that the federal 
government was not getting out of its wartime 
powers like it should. For instance rent control. 
Getting back to the housing. One of the first 
war regulations we had to enjoy. The idea 
was that when the war was over theyd take 
off rent control, and they were several years 
relieving us from rent control after the war 
was over. And most people didn’t like that. 
But government is always reluctant to give up 
any of its powers of the federal bureaucracies. 
These great bureaucracies had been created to 
handle these wartime problems. They didn’t 
want to dissolve. And states’ rights is really 
the issue all right. Every state in the union had 
the same problem. A specific instance of my 
getting involved in that housing thing evolved 
into a TV program in which the mayor at 
the time was Len Harris. His housing urban 
renewal, I think, was actually the problem. But 
there was public housing woven into the fabric. 
There was Jay Baker. They were both friends 
of mine, in a sense. We went on TV when one 
of the stations requested us. They explained 
their side. It was a debate. They explained their 
side of the problem, and I explained mine. 
We got into a real Donnybrook right on TV. 
Mayor Harris accusing me of violating the 
Republican faith and opposing Senator Robert 
A. Taft because Taft was for urban renewal. 
I took the position that Taft was for a few 
urban renewal units as opposed to hundreds 
of thousands of urban renewal units, and he 
was trying to break it down in Washington just 
like I was in Reno. But Mayor Harris made me 
kind of mad saying that I was revolting from 
the Republican tenets just because Taft was 
involved. Jay Baker who was there with him 
... Jay and I have become pretty good friends 
... but at the time I was disgusted with both of 
them. We had quite a hot TV session, and I 
guess the public liked it. 


TV at this time was relatively new as a device 
for spreading the word, a new sort of news 
media. Was it used widely during this time in 
1953? 

Yes, all politicians were turning to TV 
pretty heavily, and we were no exception 
here in Reno. The stations did not have very 
elaborate program set-up at that time, so they 
were hungry for any sort of debate they could 
create of local interest. We were frequently 
asked to appear, and always when we were 
running we’d appear two or three times. 
Of course, some of the boys paid for TV 
advertising. I don’t think I ever did. I stayed 
with a few ads in the newspapers and that was 
about the extent of my paying for advertising. 

What were the most significant items on the 
agenda in the 47th session of the legislatures? 

The 47th session was in 1955. This was 
the second time I ran and was elected. I 
think perhaps the hottest issue that time 
was the gambling bill. We still had a lot of 
the education problem to clean up form 
the previous session, but the new and most 
important... because of the heavy taxes that 
were starting to be imposed upon gaining ... 
and the ’53 and special session did impose 
some new taxes on gaming and the rate was 
getting pretty high and the federal government 
was stepping into gambling tax, believe it or 
not... with a $50 a machine tax as I recall. Up 
to this time the Nevada State Tax Commission 
had been administering the gambling licenses 
for the entire state. The Nevada State Tax 
Commission had been set up many, many 
years before to administer the tax distribution 
amongst the counties and to collect the state’s 
part of the ad valorem tax. One of the big 
chores, of course, was to tax the railroads. 
They had been given this gambling tax as 



22 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


they were a tax commission, but gambling 
was such a disparate industry from anything 
previous... entirely different from agriculture 
... entirely different from the ad valorem tax... 
entirely different from the railroad problems 
or mining ... that they felt there should be a 
new gaming commission with great authority 
to control, police, administer, and collect the 
tax from the gaming industry to see that we 
didn’t get any bad guys in the state that were 
known to be bad in other states and to fairly 
collect the tax and see that everybody paid 
... and that the whole thing was equitable. 
Well, we had nothing to go on at this time, 
for no other state in the union had legalized 
gambling. We were unique in that respect, and 
it was a devil of a problem. But we sat down, 
and I would say that we probably did more 
basic research and original thinking there 
than on any other single piece of legislation. I 
know I finally wound up on one of the house 
compromise committees between the senate 
and the assembly. I sat with Newt Crumley 
and George Von Tobel, I believe. George was 
from Vegas... with Senator Gallagher from Ely 
... and I can’t recall the others on that... but 
there had been several committees attempting 
to write a bill that would be amenable to both 
the house and the senate. And it couldn’t be 
done. Those who felt if you gave one man or 
a small group of men too much power they 
would abuse it, and there would be great 
bribery in the industry. Well, there’s always 
that possibility, and yet if you had a large group 
controlling it, there couldn’t be any effective 
administration. So, I took the position and 
I agreed pretty much with Newt Crumley ... 
and Newt had a gambling establishment in 
Elko at that time ... he was senator from Elko 
County and had been a leader in bringing in 
entertainment to the state... we looked to him 
for some new ideas in gaming, and he had a 
few. He said let’s set up an institution that if 


they don’t like the way a man combs his hair, 
he won’t get a licensee I said it feel that that 
is the way it should be too. Let them have 
absolute control because gaming is here by 
a permissiveness. It is an allowed thing. It is 
not a right, an inherent right of anybody to 
gamble or to set up a gambling institution. It is 
permissive legislation, and we can permit just 
so much and no more. But there were those, 
particularly form Vegas, who wanted it a little 
more lax because Vegas was growing so fast 
they were afraid that the north end of the state 
would tend to cool the growth in the southern 
end of the state. This is not true. There might 
have been a little of that innuendo in the 
background, but our problem was to keep 
thugs out, Detroit gangster types from getting 
in to Las Vegas. I was pretty sure they wouldn’t 
get in to Reno because our present gamblers 
here were policing themselves carefully, but 
in Vegas there were no old line, loyal gaming 
institutions, and anybody could get into Vegas 
who had the money to build a new hotel. It 
had to be watched very, very closely. As a 
matter of fact, we did set up the first gaming 
control board, the first gaming commission 
in that ’55 legislature, I think. 

You were on the public institutions committee, 
what were your duties on this committees? 

Well, essentially, the committee had been 
established to watch over all of the various 
state institutions, like the industrial school, 
the state mental hospital and the state prison, 
those institutions that were administered by 
the state. It was an important committee. 

I recall one particular instance when 
Governor Russell called me down to his 
office and said, “Rod, you’re on the public 
institutions committee.” And I said, “Yes.” 
He said, “I’m going to ask you a favor.” And I 
said, “Well, go ahead governor, I’ll be glad to 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


23 


help.” He said, “We’re having trouble with Dr. 
Tillim, the administrator of the state hospital 
in Sparks.” I said, “Oh, really? I know Dr. 
Tillim quite well, I visit with him often.” He 
is interested in some legislation here; I had 
a conference with him just the other day.” 
He said, “Well, I know that and I thought 
you might know him that’s why I’m asking 
you to do this, We feel that Dr. Tillim is a 
good doctor by gosh but he’s been giving us 
nothing but trouble, in his administration 
of the hospital as far as letting us know 
how much money he needs, when he needs 
it, how he’s spent it, his travel allotments, 
and his travel allowances are grossly out of 
order. He takes off, leaves the state and will 
stay a week. It may be worthwhile and a 
necessary trip but we don’t know why he is 
gone.” And he said, “We’d like to set up at the 
hospital to handle these reports, because he 
is causing the controller no end of trouble. 
Fred Dressier here is a member of the mental 
hospital committee and he keeps telling me 
that, and the others of the committee too that 
Dr. Tillim is awfully hard to work with in 
the detailed administration end of it. I said,” 
Well, I wouldn’t be surprised myself, I kind 
of feel that way too, but I didn’t know these 
kind of conditions existed. He said, “I’d like 
to have you. study these problems here and 
check with my staff out front about the kind 
of problems they’re having with Dr. Tillim. I’d 
like to have you introduce a bill then setting 
up, we have one drawn up here, setting up a 
business manager, and letting Dr. Tillim be in 
absolute control as far as the medical facet of it 
is concerned. But get him out of the financial 
part and the business administration.” I think 
I said, “That’s the part he likes the best.” He 
said, “Well, that’s just the problem, we know 
he does but he’s not well versed in how to do 
it. “I thought the governor was reasonable 
about it and Fred Dressier told me stories 


about the things they had had with Dr. Tillim. 
He’s a good psychiatrist and we needed him 
but I’ll never forget I was kind of shocked that 
the governor had asked me to do that when it 
was my own institution, in our own backyard 
there in Washoe and I knew Dr. Tillim so well. 
I had been supporting the man because of his 
medical approach, I didn’t know about these 
business things. But the governor gave me 
the bill and I took it up there and introduced 
it. When it hit the floor, boy the far did fly. 
Dr. Tillim was over bright and early the next 
morning. And the pow wow was started. But 
that is the way our legislature is. We finally did 
get it through; we had to modify it some. The 
business manager didn’t get as much power as 
the governor wanted, because Dr. Tillim had 
the final say so. I think that was all right or at 
least for the transition period. 

During the 47th session there was a bill 
introduced on the University of Nevada 
financing that institution, did you have any 
dealings with that bill? 

Well, I remember that we had some 
terrible rhubarbs with the University. Let me 
think a minute of the personalities involved 
there. 

Yes, there was some mention of the president 
of the university and a legislator. 

The president of the university at that 
time was Minard Stout. Yes, I recall that 
escapade. I think just the year before this 
and possibly two years before this Dr. Stout 
had come to Nevada to be president after a 
long interim period after Dr. Clark resigned... 
died. They had no president; they just had 
an administrator temporarily appointed. 
Dr. Stout was brought in from the Midwest 
with high recommendations though he had 



24 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


never been president of a university before. 
He’d been director of a high school an 
accelerated high school of some kind I think 
in Wisconsin, or Minnesota. This was his first 
venture as the president of the university He 
was a little nervous in his job and he had sort 
of an arrogant air about him. He tended to 
talk down to people; it was hard for him to sit 
down quietly and smoke his pipe, so to speak, 
and to discuss a subject without becoming 
all flustered and irritated and half angry and 
take a high and mighty approach. He was very 
difficult to work with; it was just a mannerism 
with the man; I think he was sincere and tried 
to do the job but he couldn’t get himself over. 
I remember Gary Adams, one of our fellow 
legislators, a young man, one of the youngest 
men in the house I believe Gary had been a 
gold medal student just a few years before. 
He was A1 Adams’ son, Gray Reid and Wright 
Adamses. He was a fine young man, newly 
married. He was a brilliant boy but greatly 
inexperienced himself, and strange as it may 
seem somewhat of the same mannerism as 
Dr. Stout. But he disapproved of many of the 
things Dr. Stout was doing. And one of the 
problems Gary was talking about was a small 
Board of Regents holding closed sessions 
with Dr. Stout. He was getting his way it 
seemed 100%. Gary tried to get into some of 
the regents meetings and couldn’t get in. So 
darned if he didn’t introduce a bill to expand 
the board’s members, from five to eleven men 
and to hold open meetings that anyone could 
get into. Dr. Stout came over and I remember 
we had a meeting one night that went on till 
midnight with Gary questioning Dr. Stout. 
Stout was not an old man himself, I don’t think 
but he was over 40 and Gary was about twenty 
five, and it was a real piece of entertainment. I 
don’t recall what came out of it, but I believe 
the bill did increase the number of regents 
but not as many as Gary wanted. We did 


increase it some and get a clause in to make 
public meetings announced in advance so 
citizens could get to the meetings if they had 
something they were interested about the 
university. The university was going through 
trying times then, for of course it was growing 
to and the plant had become rather run down 
during the war and they needed an awful lot 
of money. It seemed exorbitant at the time 
in relation to what they had been asking for 
in the past. But the institution was growing, 
and there was a strange thing., there was 
apparently a need in Las Vegas for a three year 
junior college down there. And that subject 
came up when the university here in Reno 
was demanding huge amounts of funds. And 
of course the Vegas delegation wanted to get 
that college started down there. 

One of your more famous bills that you 
introduced into the assembly and one that was 
passed was the license plate bill. Where did you 
get your idea from? 

Yes, I was interested in that having been 
born and reared in the state and coming from 
Elko County then moving to Washoe County. 
This came about essentially from my being in 
the motel business, we are very conscious of 
license plates; that is how we can tell a tourist 
from a local person by the license plate on his 
car. Strange as it may seem we usually treat 
Californians differently than somebody from 
Illinois or New York or Pennsylvania because 
we know basically that they are different kinds 
of people. It’s just a little idiosyncrasy from the 
business that you pick up. I thought it would 
be nice if you knew the Nevada cars and what 
county they are from, as the people of the 
various counties moved around. And there 
was a pride in each county in their own cars 
and their own registration... how much taxes 
they were generating in the automobile fund. I 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


25 


thought it would be a good idea, and they were 
starting to use letters as well as numbers on 
the license plates because the number system 
was getting too big. So I went to the motor 
vehicle department. Marvin Humphrey was 
director of the thing at that time, and I was 
surprised to find out that he was agreeable to 
the same idea. And we sat down, and he and I 
and one of his staff members quickly designed 
a lettering system that would fit. We had to 
be careful that we didn’t get a county ending 
in I mixed up with the number one or an 1, 
so we let White Pine be WP and Elko be El. 
All of the counties would have two letters 
then the various numbers. But because of 
the huge registration of Clark and Washoe 
counties, we could only use one letter, so we 
made W for Washoe and C for Clark. I was 
rather surprised, because up to that time I 
had introduced no legislation at all that had 
come near passing, and this whipped through 
unanimously without a dissenting vote. I 
just accidentally tapped the consensus of the 
legislature as well as that of the state. I was 
amazed at the publicity I got out of it because 
I didn’t consider it a very important bill. 

In general, the decade of the 1950’s in Nevada 
saw Nevada as the fastest growing state in the 
union, saw Nevada have the youngest average 
age group than any other state, saw Nevada 
bank assets double, saw a high per capita 
income. In other words, there was a big money 
boom, there was a housing boom, and of course 
all of these education problems were tied in 
with this growth. Did you feel that you were 
an up and coming state in 1953, that you were 
going to grow, and did the legislature want to 
help this growth? 

Oh, yes I was in business at that time and 
looking forward to great things. We were all 
going to be millionaires shortly. It was a time 


of taking chances, taking more risks than 
you normally would. Growth means inflation 
somewhat, property values were going up. It 
was a good feeling, it was fun to be in business. 

It was a devil of a time to be in the 
legislature because of the problems all of 
this was creating: from a judicial standpoint 
and an administrative standpoint, for the 
governor and the various state departments. 
We didn’t have a computer system, we had 
old archaic offices that had to be expanded, it 
was a very trying time. There were some very 
astute men, particularly in the senate who 
guided the thing. I think we were blessed with 
pretty good governors as a whole. Governor 
Russell I felt was an extremely good governor, 
because he was so easy to know, so easy 
to talk to, so easy to approach. He had no 
preconceived ideas that he would hang on to 
no matter what, so if they needed something 
rather than cause a ruckus he’d go along with 
them. Governor Carville had been governor 
just a few years before that. He was a loyal 
Nevadan and a very understanding man; he’d 
been a good governor. Vail Pittman, I’d think, 
was probably the least able, but he was a loyal 
Nevadan too. Vail Pittman was a Democrat, 
but they were in. Ted Carville was a Democrat 
too, but he called himself a Dixiecrat; he was 
a conservative Democrat. Dick Kerman was 
one of the state’s leading bankers in those 
formative years. We had a series of good 
governors. In fact, I don’t think we’ve had a 
real bad one. Pittman was the worst, but then 
he wasn’t bad. 

You mentioned there were several leaders in 
the senate at this time, pretty influential people. 
Who were some of these peoples? 

The father of the senate, one of the oldest 
and continuous senators was Fred Settelmeyer 
from Gardnerville/Minden, a conservative 



26 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


area. Fred was a Dutchman, a German, a 
very astute man ... a kind and courteous 
man, a highly knowledgeable man. He read 
consistently and knew his way around. He 
was an old man then. Senator Gallagher from 
Ely was a knowledgeable man ... a man who 
made it a point to continue his reading and 
stay up-to-date with things. These were all 
older men at that time. There were a couple 
of fine young men from Las Vegas. Mahlon 
Brown was a Democrat, a new senator about 
the time I went to the assembly. He was an 
attorney and a fine fellow; he fit right in very 
well. We had a lieutenant governor, Rex Bell, 
during one of our sessions. He was a famous 
personality, but Rex was a fine fellow. He 
was not a native Nevadan, but he was loyal 
to Nevada; he loved Nevada. He was a good 
politician, and he got along well with the 
Democrats. Just prior to Rex Bell we had 
Cliff Jones. We had Cliff Jones who was a 
young and up and coming fellow from Las 
Vegas. He kind of got himself in trouble in 
later years, but the time he was lieutenant 
governor and the president of the senate he 
was very effective and got along well. The 
senate in those days was one man from each 
county. The cow counties had fifteen votes, 
Washoe had one, and Clark had one. So there 
was no great domination of the state by the 
two population centers. I always thought that 
was good because the cow counties tend to 
stabilize some of these ambitious ideas that 
were emanating from Reno and Las Vegas. 

What were your relations with M. E. 
McCuiston, Speaker of the Assembly ? 

Ted McCuiston became speaker of the 
assembly through rather a fluke. I don’t know 
how many times this has happened in the 
past. We had in the ’53 assembly what we 
called a coalition assembly. There was such a 


wild rampant group of labor leading liberals 
in the Democratic party vs. a substantial 
conservative, down to earth Democrats led 
by Cyril Bastian and Ted McCuiston. Ted was 
from Elko and Cyril Bastian was from Lincoln 
County, Hiko ... very fine men ... they were 
Democrats but they were conservatives. Arid 
here was this wild labor bunch led by Sailor 
Ryan, Bill Embry, and that ilk from Clark 
County and the southern part of the state; 
even the Democrats couldn’t stand them. 
So these conservative Democrats made an 
approach to us Washoe and northern state 
Republicans ... could we coalesce with you to 
vote in the officers of the assembly to prevent 
Ryan and that clique of wild jackasses from 
Las Vegas from running the whole legislature 
this year. We said why sure. We’ll vote with 
you if you will let us have a representative 
seat on these committees. And they said 
we will. As Democrats we can’t let you have 
a chairmanship. We’ll be chairmen, but 
we’ll only have one more Democrat than 
Republican on the committees. And we’ll 
elect a conservative Democrat to be speaker 
of the house and not a wild one from the labor 
ranks of Las Vegas. If we don’t coalesce, we’re 
pretty sure Sailor Ryan will become speaker 
or Bill Embrey will be. So we went entirely 
through that session with a coalition set up 
of a few conservative Democrats coalesced 
with the total Republicans and were able to 
out vote the liberals. And Ted McCuiston 
became the speaker out of that. He never 
would have made it out of his own party 
alone. We Republicans voted him in. 

Did this conflict with Sailor Ryan originate 
from the “Yellow Dog Bill,” the right to work 
bill? 

Somewhat, not exclusively. That was one 
of the many ramifications. Labor has always 



A Cold War Politician of Nevada in the Fifties 


27 


got a multitude of wild, wild things. Common 
sites was a hot issue even then. It always is in 
any state legislature. The right to work bill was 
part of it. Even though the public had voted 
in the right to work, they wanted to change 
it at the legislative level. It wasn’t only that... 




Original Index: 
For Reference Only 


In order to standardize the design of all UNOHP transcripts for the online database, they have 
been reformatted, a process that was completed in early 2012. This document may therefore differ 
in appearance and pagination from earlier printed versions. Rather than compile entirely new 
indexes for each volume, the UNOHP has made each transcript fully searchable electronically. If 
a previous version of this volume existed, its original index has been appended to this document 
for reference only. A link to the entire catalog can be found online at http://oralhistory.unr.edu/. 



30 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


A 


Adams, Gary, 53 

Alaska, Finance Plan, 34, 35 

Allen, 3, 4 


Clark, Walter, 52 
Crumley, Newton, 48, 49 


B 

Badt, Gertrude Nitze, 4 
Badt, Milton, 4 
Baker, J., 46 
Bank Club, 37 
Banking, 12 
Bastian, Cyril, 58 
Bell, Rex, 57 
Biltz, Norman, 

Boulder D 

Brussar 1, 16 

Carville, Ted, 56 
Cattle, 2 

Civilian Conservation Corps, 
1-3, 4 

Chamber of Commerce-Reno, 
15-17, 20 


Democratic Party, 4, 5, 30, 
35, 43, 58, 59 

Depression, 1, 4, 5-10, 

20 

Divorce Trade, 

Dressier, 



ion, Public, 24, 26, 

7, 36 , 38, 39-41, 47 

Elko, City of, 1, 4, 49 

Elko, County of, 2, 4, 49, 54 

Ely, 2, 25 

Embry, William, 58 


Fort Churchill, 1,2, 3 
G 

Gallagher, Charles D., 48, 57 
Gaming, 22-24, 29, 32, 36-37,47 



Original Index: For Reference Only 


31 


Gaming Control Board, 49-50 
Getchell, Noble, 12, 14, 18 
Gray, Les, 19, 20 
Gray Reid and Wright C., 53 
Growth, Nevadan, 22 


Lerude, Leslie, 21 
License Plates, 54, 55 
Lobbying, Legislative, J6, 37 
Lovelock, Forest, 11 

M 


H 

Harrah, William, 31 , 37 

Harris,Leonard, 46 

Highways, Nevada State Dept., 
3. 7. 8 

Hiko, Lincoln County, 58 

Hospital, Nevada State, 5 
52 

Housing, Public 
Humphrey 


, Marsh, 11 
Jones,Clifford, A., 58 


Mapes, Charles, 31 
McCarran, Pat, 17 , 

McCuiston, 

McDermi 

Association, 



National Education Assoc., 28 
Newpapers, Local, 33 , 38 , 47 


Orovada, 7 


K 

Kean, Thomas, 33 
Kidding, Allen, 7 
Kirman, Richard, 3» 57 

L 

Labor, Organized, 4-5, 35, 36, 
59 

Las Vegas, 2, 11, 27, 28, 38 
49, 54, 58, 59 


Palace Club, 37 

Paradise Hill, 7 

Peabody Educational Advisory 
Group, 26-27, 30, 38 

Pittman, Key, 14 

Pittman, Vail, 14, 15, 57 

Pittsburgh,Pennsylvania, 7 

Politics, 11, 20, 21-25 



32 


Rodney J. Reynolds 


R 


Railroads, 4, 43 

Railroaders, 2 

Reno, 2, 3 , 6 , 9, 10, 

11 - 13 , 27 , 44 

Reno, City Council, 44 

Republican Party, 4-5, 12, 

18 , 21 , 25 , 43 , 58 

Reynolds, Patricia, 8 

Riverside Hotel, 13 

Robbins, John E., 1, 4, 5 

Roosevelt, F.D., 1, 13 , 14, 18 

Rotary, Club, 13 , 20 


Taft, Robert A., 46 
Taxes, 

22 , 23, 24, 29, 30, 31, 32, 
3^ * 36 , 39, 40, 47, 48 

Territorial Enterprise , 

~~£l 


Tilli.m, Sidney, 50-52 
Tourism, 9 , 20 , 58-9 


Univ€ 


la, 52, 54 



Russell, Charles, 
50, 51, 56 


Ryan, " 


layer , Fred, 57 
Sheep, 2 

Silver State Lodge, 9 , 10 
Smith Valley, 8 
Socialism, 19 , 20 
Soil Conservation Service, 8 
Southworth Tobacco Co., 11 
Sparks, 8 , 25, 50 
State Park Service, 1-6 
Stout, Minard, 52, 53 


Tobel, George, 48 


Walker, Edward, 16 

Walker, Margaret, 8 

War, World II, 12, 13 

Welfare, 19, 23 , 25, 34, 36 

Western Pacific Railroad, 2,5 

Wigwam Coffee Shop, 21 

Wingfield, Family, 12, 13 , 
14-17, 18 

Winnemucca, 7 

Wooster, Earl, 28 


Young, Clifton, 1 . 9 , 20 
Young Turk, Movement, 18-20 






