Regional  Oral  History  Office  University  of  California 

The  Bancroft  Library  Berkeley,  California 


College  of  Engineering  Oral  History  Series 


John  R.  Whinnery 

RESEARCHER  AND  EDUCATOR  IN  ELECTROMAGNETICS,  MICROWAVES, 
AND  OPTOELECTRONICS,  1935-1995;  DEAN  OF  THE  COLLEGE 
OF  ENGINEERING,  UC  BERKELEY,  1959-1963 


With  an  Introduction  by 
Donald  0.  Pederson 


Interviews  Conducted  by 

Ann  Lage 

in  1994 


Copyright  ©  1996  by  The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California 


Since  1954  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  has  been  interviewing  leading 
participants  in  or  well-placed  witnesses  to  major  events  in  the  development  of 
Northern  California,  the  West,  and  the  Nation.  Oral  history  is  a  modern  research 
technique  involving  an  interviewee  and  an  informed  interviewer  in  spontaneous 
conversation.  The  taped  record  is  transcribed,  lightly  edited  for  continuity  and 
clarity,  and  reviewed  by  the  interviewee.  The  resulting  manuscript  is  typed  in 
final  form,  indexed,  bound  with  photographs  and  illustrative  materials,  and 
placed  in  The  Bancroft  Library  at  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  and 
other  research  collections  for  scholarly  use.  Because  it  is  primary  material, 
oral  history  is  not  intended  to  present  the  final,  verified,  or  complete 
narrative  of  events.  It  is  a  spoken  account,  offered  by  the  interviewee  in 
response  to  questioning,  and  as  such  it  is  reflective,  partisan,  deeply  involved, 
and  irreplaceable. 


************************************ 


All  uses  of  this  manuscript  are  covered  by  a  legal  agreement 
between  The  Regents  of  the  University  of  California  and  John  R. 
Whinnery  dated  February  9,  1994.  The  manuscript  is  thereby  made 
available  for  research  purposes.  All  literary  rights  in  the 
manuscript,  including  the  right  to  publish,  are  reserved  to  The 
Bancroft  Library  of  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley.  No  part 
of  the  manuscript  may  be  quoted  for  publication  without  the  written 
permission  of  the  Director  of  The  Bancroft  Library  of  the  University 
of  California,  Berkeley. 

Requests  for  permission  to  quote  for  publication  should  be 
addressed  to  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  486  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley  94720,  and  should  include 
identification  of  the  specific  passages  to  be  quoted,  anticipated 
use  of  the  passages,  and  identification  of  the  user.  The  legal 
agreement  with  John  R.  Whinnery  requires  that  he  be  notified  of  the 
request  and  allowed  thirty  days  in  which  to  respond. 

It  is  recommended  that  this  oral  history  be  cited  as  follows: 


John  R.  Whinnery,  "Researcher  and  Educator 
in  Electromagnetics,  Microwaves,  and 
Optoelectronics,  1935-1995;  Dean  of  the 
College  of  Engineering,  UC  Berkeley,  1959- 
1963,"  an  oral  history  conducted  in  1994 
by  Ann  Lage,  Regional  Oral  History  Office, 
The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley,  1996. 


Copy  no. 


John  R.  Whinnery,  May  1994. 

Photograph  by  Peg  Skorpinski 


Cataloging  information 

Whinnery,  John  W.  (b.  1916)  Professor  of  Electrical  Engineering 

Researcher  and  Educator  in  Electromagnetics.  Microwaves,  and  Optoelectronics, 
1935-1995;  Dean  of  the  College  of  Engineering.  UC  Berkeley.  1959-1963.  1996, 
vii,  273  pp. 

Family  and  youth  in  western  Colorado  and  Modesto,  California;  undergraduate 
education,  University  of  California,  1930s;  General  Electric  Advanced 
Engineering  Program  and  microwave  research,  1937-1946,  collaboration  with 
Simon  Ramo;  research  program  at  Hughes  Aircraft,  1951-1952;  UC  Berkeley 
College  of  Engineering,  1946-1995:  postwar  graduate  studies,  growth  of  the 
Department  of  Electrical  Engineering,  Electronics  Research  Laboratory,  faculty 
recruitment  and  retention,  undergraduate  and  graduate  curriculum,  governance 
issues  as  dean  (1959-1963),  former  dean  Morrough  O'Brien;  research  and 
teaching  in  electromagnetic  fields  and  waves  and  optoelectronics;  service  on 
governmental,  scientific,  and  industry  advisory  boards,  NASA  Apollo  program, 
1964-1969. 

Introduction  by  Donald  0.  Pederson,  Professor  Emeritus  of  Electrical 
Engineering  and  Computer  Sciences,  University  of  California,  Berkeley. 

Interviewed  1994  by  Ann  Lage  for  the  College  of  Engineering  Oral  History 
Series.   Regional  Oral  History  Office,  The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of 
California,  Berkeley. 


This  oral  history  of 

John  R.  Whinnery 
has  been  funded  by  the  generous  contributions  of 


Ronald  V.  Schmidt,  EE  '66  '68  '71 

George  J.  Maslach,  ME  '42 
Dean  Emeritus 

The  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  Engineering  Alumni  Society 
The  Berkeley  Engineering  Fund 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS --John  R.  Whinnery 

INTRODUCTION- -by  Donald  0.  Pederson  i 

INTERVIEW  HISTORY- -by  Ann  Lage  iv 

BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION  vii 


I   FAMILY  BACKGROUND  AND  EDUCATION,  1916  TO  1937  1 

Parents  and  Grandparents  in  Western  Colorado,  1870s  to  1916  1 

Family  and  Boyhood  in  Read,  Colorado  6 

Father's  Light  Plant  in  Austin  7 

Life  in  a  Small  Community  8 

The  Ten-Dollar  Pig  12 

Family  Pastimes  and  Holidays  13 

The  Move  to  Modesto,  California,  1927,  and  Father's  Failing  Health  16 

High  School  in  Modesto  18 

Teachers  18 

Friends,  and  Hobbies  19 

Family  Life  in  Modesto  20 

Modesto  Junior  College  22 

University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1935  to  1937  24 

Social  Life  25 

Education  in  Engineering  at  Berkeley  26 

Other  Coursework  29 

University  Medalist  30 

Looking  for  Work  During  the  Depression  32 

II   GENERAL  ELECTRIC,  SCHENECTADY,  NEW  YORK,  1937  TO  1946  34 

GE  Test  Program,  Erie,  Pennsylvania  35 

GE  Advanced  Engineering  Program  36 

B.  D.  Bedford  37 

W.  C.  Hahn  38 

Simon  Ramo,  and  Collaboration  on  Fields  and  Waves  in 

Modern  Radio  39 

Poetry  Writing  41 

Work  Assignments  in  the  Advanced  Engineering  Program  42 

GE  During  World  War  II  43 

The  Influence  of  the  War  on  Electronics  Research  45 

Fellow  Researchers  at  GE  47 

Leaving  GE  47 

More  on  Simon  Ramo  48 

Other  Activities  in  Schenectady  50 

Marriage  to  Patricia  Barry,  1944  50 

III   RETURN  TO  UC  BERKELEY,  1946  TO  1952,  AS  GRADUATE  STUDENT, 

LECTURER,  ASSOCIATE  PROFESSOR  52 

Graduate  Student  52 

Department  of  Electrical  Engineering,  Postwar  53 

Requirements  of  the  Ph.D.  Program  55 


Growth  of  the  Department  57 

Samuel  Silver  59 

IV   HUGHES  AIRCRAFT,  1951  TO  1952  61 

Microwave  Tube  Research  Section  62 

Working  Conditions  at  Hughes  63 

Simon  Ramo  and  Dean  Wooldridge  64 

Research  and  the  Cold  War  65 

Comparing  Industry  and  Academia,  and  Return  to  Berkeley  65 

Howard  Hughes  67 

Hughes  Aircraft  and  the  Value  of  Industrial  Experience  68 

V   VICE  CHAIR,  DIVISION  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING,  HEAD  OF  ELECTRONICS 

RESEARCH  LABORATORY,  UC  BERKELEY,  1952  TO  1956  69 

Collegiality  and  Personnel  in  Electrical  Engineering  69 

Early  Computer  Research  70 

Returning  to  UC  Berkeley  72 

Morrough  O'Brien  and  Sam  Silver  72 

Electronics  Research  Lab:   Establishment  and  Federal  Funding  74 

More  on  Morrough  O'Brien  and  on  Organizing  EE  Research  78 

Patents  on  Faculty  Research  81 

The  Loyalty  Oath,  and  Classified  Research  82 

VI   CHAIR,  DIVISION  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING,  1956  TO  1958  84 

Division  versus  Department  84 

Paul  Morton's  Resignation;  Whinnery's  Appointment  as  Chair  85 

Recruiting  Faculty  86 

Electrical  Engineering  Curriculum  90 

Science  versus  Application  92 

The  Common  Lower  Division  Curriculum  93 

O'Brien's  Policy  and  Budget  Committee  94 

Clark  Kerr  and  Morrough  O'Brien  95 

The  Academic  Senate  and  Engineering  96 

VII   DEAN,  COLLEGE  OF  ENGINEERING,  1959  TO  1963  100 

Appointment  as  Dean  100 

Improving  Relations  with  Other  Colleges  102 

Organization  of  the  College  104 

Mechanical  Engineering  104 

Communication  within  the  College  and  Beyond  106 

Small  Departments:   Naval  Architecture  and  Materials  Science  108 

Personnel  in  the  College  of  Engineering  110 

Construction  of  New  Buildings  112 

Richmond  Field  Station  115 

Operations  Research  Center  115 

Faculty  Recruitment  117 

Women  and  Minorities  118 

Recruiting  Mistakes  119 

The  Budget  Committee  of  the  Academic  Senate  120 

Relations  with  UC  Davis  Engineering  122 

Relations  with  UC  Santa  Barbara  Engineering  123 

Relations  with  "Teller  Tech,"  Livermore  125 


International  Programs  127 

Relations  with  UCLA  Engineering  130 

A  Status  Report  on  the  College  During  Whinnery's  Deanship  131 

Curriculum  135 

Break-up  of  the  Common  Lower  Division  135 

Specialization  in  the  Upper  Division  Curriculum  138 

The  Social  Science  Requirement  139 

Engineering  Science  Program,  and  the  Three-Two  Program  142 

Engineering  Advisory  Council  144 

Engineering  Alumni  Society  146 

Community  Relations,  and  Fund  Raising  147 

The  College's  Self -Study  Program,  and  Retreat  at  Tahoe  148 

Engineering  Programs  within  UC  Extension  151 

Selection  of  Lotfi  Zadeh  as  Chair  of  Electrical  Engineering  152 

Building  Up  Other  Campuses  with  Berkeley  Professors  154 

Leaving  the  Deanship  155 

Commission  on  Engineering  Education  157 

The  Course  of  the  College  Since  1963  159 

VIII   POST- 1963  UNIVERSITY  SERVICE  160 

Chairman,  University  Four-Letter  Word  Committee  160 

The  Continuing  Turbulence  of  the  Late  Sixties  and  Seventies  162 

Appointment  to  UC  Santa  Cruz  Applied  Technology  Program,  1968  164 

Return  to  Berkeley;  University  Professorship  168 

Service  on  University  Committees   •  170 

IX   RESEARCH  AND  TEACHING  173 

Electromagnetic  Fields  and  Waves:   Approach  to  Problems  173 

Associate  Research  Engineer  George  Becker  176 

Work  on  Backward-Wave  Turnable  Amplifier,  and  Noise  Aspects  177 

Other  Researchers,  and  Publication  178 

Teaching  and  Guiding  Graduate  Students  179 

Quantum  and  Optical  Electronics  182 
Developing  Group  Research  with  Graduate  Students  and  Other 

Professors  184 

Funding  for  Research  187 

Optics  and  Laser  Research  190 

X  SERVICE  TO  GOVERNMENTAL  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AGENCIES  194 
Advisory  Group  on  Electronic  Devices,  Department  of 

Defense,  1957  to  1966  194 

Classified  Consultant  on  the  ICBM,  1957  195 
NASA  Science  and  Technology  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Apollo 

Program,  1964  to  1969  196 
National  Science  Foundation  Committee  on  Research  Applied  to 

National  Needs  [RANN]  197 
National  Academy  of  Sciences  Committee  on  Science  and  Public 

Policy  [COSPUP],  1970s  198 
Atomic  Energy  Commission  Standing  Committee  on  Controlled 

Thermonuclear  Research,  1970-1973  199 

IEEE  Board  of  Directors  199 

NAS  Reports  Review  Committee,  1970s- 1980s  201 


NRC  Committee  on  Photonics  202 
Department  of  Defense:   Ramo  Task  Force  of  the  Defense  Science 

Board,  1966-1968  202 

University-Visiting  Committees  203 

More  on  NASA  and  Apollo  205 
National  Research  Council  Telecommunications  Committee,  1974-1976  207 

Service  on  Industry  Advisory  Boards  208 

XI   FAMILY  LIFE  AND  LEISURE  210 

TAPE  GUIDE  213 

APPENDICES  214 

A.  "Growth  of  the  College  of  Engineering,"  draft  essay  prepared 
by  John  Whinnery  for  inclusion  in  Clark  Kerr's  in-process 
memoir,  The  Gold  and  the  Blue--A  Personal  Memoir  of  the 
University  of  California,  Part  I:   First  Chancellor  at 

Berkeley,  1952-1958  (proposed  title).  215 

B.  Selected  Poems  by  John  R.  Whinnery  228 

C.  Curriculum  Vitae  and  Publications  List  252 

INDEX  266 


INTRODUCTION- -by  Donald  0.  Pederson 


John  Roy  Whinnery's  undeniable  brilliance  has  many  outlets—the  joy 
of  knowing  him  is  in  uncovering  the  boundless,  often  paradoxical  talents 
that  make  him  so  remarkable.  Gentlemanly  and  unassuming,  John  reveals 
these  talents  with  only  the  utmost  modesty.  That  his  many  contributions 
are  now  chronicled  in  this  volume  is  a  delight  to  his  admirers  the  world 
over. 

John  is  one  the  world's  most  distinguished  electrical  engineering 
innovators  and  educators.  For  fifty-eight  years,  he  has  made  superb 
contributions  as  a  researcher  in  electrical  sciences,  classroom  teacher, 
research  mentor,  author,  academic  administrator,  and  senior  counselor  and 
statesman  in  professional  activities.  These  weighty  achievements  are 
rounded  by  his  other  personae--the  gifted  poet,  teller  of  children's 
tales,  vintner  of  wonderful  wines,  and  troubled  but  valiant  golfer.   In 
all  (even  the  last),  he  is  a  man  of  unlimited  creativity. 

John  came  from  a  financially  poor  family  in  Modesto,  California, 
having  started  life  in  the  remote  western  mountains  of  Colorado.   He 
began  studies  at  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  in  the  early 
days  of  the  Great  Depression,  but  his  financial  plight  forced  him  to 
return  home  to  attend  Modesto  Junior  College.   His  instructors  there  were 
greatly  impressed  with  John's  quick  mind  and  fine  character.   They  knew 
he  would  flourish  at  Berkeley—but  funding  remained  beyond  John's  reach. 
Unbeknownst  to  John,  several  of  his  teachers  took  up  a  collection  and 
financed  a  scholarship  to  send  him  back  to  Cal.   What  a  record  he  made  at 
Berkeley,  graduating  in  1937  with  the  University  Medal,  the  campus's 
highest  student  honor,  awarded  to  the  top  graduating  senior  at  the 
University. 

The  award  would  be  the  first  of  many  to  come,  culminating  in  June 
1992  with  the  White  House  presentation  of  the  National  Medal  of  Science, 
the  highest  honor  for  an  American  scientist.   John  is  also  one  of  a 
handful  elected  to  both  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  and  the  National 
Academy  of  Engineering.   His  contributions  have  been  acknowledged  by  more 
than  twenty  major  awards,  including  the  highest  honors  of  several 
professional  organizations:  the  Founder's  Award  of  the  National  Academy 
of  Engineering,  the  Medal  of  Honor  of  the  Institute  of  Electrical  and 
Electronics  Engineers  (IEEE),  and  the  Lamme  Medal  of  the  American  Society 
for  Engineering  Education. 

In  John's  first  professional  position  with  the  General  Electric 
Company,  he  displayed  his  exceptional  knack  for  identifying  new  and 
critically  important  fields,  developing  innovative  solutions,  and  making 
significant  professional  contributions.   This  became  a  career-long 
pattern,  first  exhibited  in  work  on  microwave  components  and  followed 


ii 


over  the  years  with  similarly  outstanding  research  in  traveling-wave  and 
backward-wave  electron  tubes,  quantum  electron  devices,  and  integrated 
optics.   The  pattern  was  a  hallmark  of  his  work  at  Berkeley,  where  he 
joined  the  faculty  in  electrical  engineering  in  1946  and  today  holds  the 
position  of  University  Professor  Emeritus,  the  first  engineer  ever 
appointed  to  this  special  status  as  a  treasured  scholarly  resource  at  all 
nine  University  of  California  campuses. 

John's  early  work  led  to  advances  in  the  understanding  and  operation 
of  microwave  circuits  and  triodes  and  to  traveling-wave  tubes,  still  in 
use  today  in  communication  satellites.  (Significantly,  he  was  awarded  the 
IEEE  Microwave  Career  Award  in  1976.)   He  contributed  to  the 
understanding  of  high-frequency  electrical  noise  in  electronic  devices. 
He  was  an  early  leader  in  the  field  of  lasers  and  fundamental  quantum 
electronics.   Recently,  he  has  been  a  pioneer  in  producing  and  using  very 
short  pulses  to  study  fast  processes  in  materials  and  chemistry.   These 
varied  advances  are  catalogued  in  more  than  200  research  papers. 

Also  an  outgrowth  of  John's  years  at  General  Electric  was 
his  collaboration  with  Simon  Ramo  in  developing  the  pioneering  textbook 
on  microwaves.   Several  editions  later,  Fields  and  Waves  in  Communication 
Electronics  is  still  a  classic.   Former  students  and  friends  gathered  in 
May  1994  for  a  special  celebration  honoring  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of 
the  book's  publication;  they  also  surprised  John  at  the  event  by  endowing 
the  John  R.  Whinnery  Chair  in  Electrical  Engineering  and  Computer 
Sciences  at  Berkeley. 

As  he  has  been  a  leader  in  new  fields  of  study,  John  has  also  been 
at  the  forefront  in  education,  developing  new  courses  and  materials  and 
lending  administrative  counsel  on  a  national  scale.   He  contributed  new 
curricula  on  his  own  research  topics  but  also  created  new,  critically 
needed  introductory  courses  in  electronics,  as  well  as  secondary  school 
materials  through  the  Man-Made  World  Project.   For  thousands  of  students, 
he  has  been  a  gifted  teacher  and  thoughtful  lecturer.   He  has  supervised 
more  than  thirty  doctoral  students—the  list  of  their  subsequent 
engineering  contributions  is  astonishing.   He  has  attracted  the  best,  and 
has  brought  out  the  best  in  all  of  them. 

Although  his  main  love  has  always  been  teaching  and  research,  John 
also  brought  his  best  to  an  assortment  of  pivotal  administrative 
assignments,  chiefly  at  Berkeley.   He  was  drafted  to  take  charge  of  the 
campus's  newly  formed  Electronics  Research  Laboratory  from  1952-1956  and 
was  chair  of  the  Division  and  then  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering 
from  1956-1959,  a  time  of  major  growth.   He  guided  the  department  into 
the  important  new  areas  of  solid-state  electronics,  plasmas,  and  system 
and  communication  theories . 


iii 


From  1959-1963,  John  was  dean  of  the  College  of  Engineering  at 
Berkeley.   This  was  a  time  of  great  transition  and  stress  in  the  college. 
In  a  characteristically  quiet  and  effective  manner,  John  identified  not 
only  the  problems  but  also  the  politically  and  educationally  possible 
solutions. 

When  he  returned  to  his  regular  faculty  role  after  finishing  his 
tenure  as  dean,  John  continued  to  be  a  sought-after  national  adviser  on 
matters  of  engineering  education.   He  also  was  deeply  involved  as  an 
adviser  to  the  National  Academies  of  Sciences  and  Engineering,  a  key 
figure  in  the  creation  of  the  Commission  on  Engineering  Education,  and  a 
member  of  NASA's  scientific  and  technical  committee  for  the  Apollo  Space 
Program. 

Finally,  all  who  know  him  will  attest  that  there  is  no  kinder,  more 
gentlemanly  soul  than  John  Whinnery.  His  many  talents,  worn  with  such 
humility  and  humanity,  make  him  a  cherished  friend  and  compatriot.   Many 
of  us  have  marveled  at  his  lovely  sonnets  for  his  true  love  Pat,  his 
limericks  for  all  occasions,  and  his  tales  of  creatures  of  the  Mendocino 
coast,  woven  for  his  own  children  and  those  of  generations  of  younger 
colleagues.   Many  have  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  his  study  and  perseverance 
as  a  vintner,  when  in  his  cellar,  which  happens  to  be  his  garage,  he 
produced  fine  chardonnay,  gewurtztraminer,  and  cabernet.   Alas,  his 
brilliance  has  yet  to  shine  on  his  golf  game—but  even  a  renaissance  man 
need  not  break  par. 

Successive  generations  of  chancellors,  deans,  and  professors  have 
turned  to  John  for  advice  and  direction,  and  his  quiet  leadership  in  this 
capacity  has  been  wonderfully  effective.   Whatever  his  counsel,  it  always 
carries  one  clear  message:  make  the  best  of  what  you  have  and  draw  out 
the  best  of  those  around  you.   John  Whinnery  has  done  no  less  in  his  own 
career,  with  stunning  results.   His  legacy  is  a  cadre  of  accomplished 
students,  vibrant  new  technologies,  and  a  strong  and  grateful  University. 


Donald  0.  Pederson 

Professor  Emeritus  of  Electrical 

Engineering  and  Computer  Sciences 

November  1,  1995 

University  of  California,  Berkeley 


iv 


INTERVIEW  HI STORY- -by  Ann  Lage 


John  R.  Whinnery,  Berkeley's  nationally  honored  researcher  and 
educator  in  electrical  engineering,  was  interviewed  by  the  Regional  Oral 
History  Office  at  the  request  of  the  College  of  Engineering.   This  was 
the  second  in  a  series  of  oral  histories  with  former  deans  of  the  college 
designed  to  document  the  history  of  the  college,  as  well  as  the  lives  and 
scholarly  contributions  of  its  deans.   The  series  was  initiated  in  1988 
with  an  oral  history  with  Morrough  P.  O'Brien,  John  Whinnery 's 
predecessor  as  dean. 

Professor  Whinnery 's  oral  history  makes  a  major  contribution  to 
this  series.   His  connection  with  the  College  of  Engineering  spans  a 
period  of  sixty  years,  from  1935  to  the  present,  as  an  undergraduate  and 
graduate  student,  professor,  researcher  in  microwaves  and 
optoelectronics,  director  of  the  Electronics  Research  Laboratory,  chair 
of  the  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering,  dean,  and  member  of 
important  professional,  University,  and  governmental  committees  and 
commissions . 

From  these  multiple  vantage  points,  his  oral  history  contributes  to 
our  understanding  of  the  growth  of  the  College  of  Engineering  from  the 
provincial,  mostly  undergraduate,  institution  of  the  1930s  to  the  major 
research  and  educational  institution  of  the  1990s.   His  personal  account 
reveals  the  many  individual  decisions  and  the  variety  of  faculty,  staff, 
and  students  which  have  contributed  over  the  years  to  the  success  of  the 
larger  enterprise. 

Preparation  for  this  oral  history  began  with  David  Brown,  budget 
officer  in  the  Dean's  Office  and  the  coordinator  of  this  project.   He  and 
Professor  Emeritus  Alan  Searcy  met  with  me  to  discuss  the  scope  of  the 
oral  history,  to  suggest  potential  topics,  and  to  put  me  in  touch  with 
colleagues  who  could  assist  with  background  information.   Subsequent 
meetings  with  Professors  Don  Pederson  and  Ted  Van  Duzer,   Professor 
Whinnery 's  colleagues  in  electrical  engineering  proved  invaluable  in 
suggesting  topics  and  lines  of  questioning  on  his  work  in  microwaves  and 
optoelectronics.   Professor  Emeritus  George  Maslach,  who  succeeded  him  as 
dean,  had  many  helpful  insights,  and  former  Chancellor  Glenn  Seaborg,  who 
appointed  Whinnery  as  dean,  provided  additional  context. 

Also  consulted  were  the  Whinnery  papers  in  The  Bancroft  Library, 
covering  the  years  1946-1978;  his  publications  (especially  those  few 
which  are  accessible  to  the  generalist);  a  previous  interview  with  John 
Whinnery  conducted  by  his  colleague  Charles  Susskind  in  1988;  and  oral 
histories  with  Simon  Ramo,  coauthor  with  Whinnery  of  the  classic  text  on 


microwaves,  with  UC  Physics  Professor  Charles  Townes,  and  with  Morrough 
P.  O'Brien  (references  for  these  oral  histories  can  be  found  in  the 
transcript) . 

Shortly  before  our  interview  sessions,  Professor  Whinnery  had 
prepared  for  former  University  President  Clark  Kerr's  memoirs  an  essay  on 
the  College  of  Engineering  and  the  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering 
during  the  Kerr  years  as  chancellor  of  the  Berkeley  campus .  Rather  than 
cover  the  same  ground  again  in  our  interviews,  we  agreed  to  include  this 
essay  as  an  appendix  to  the  oral  history  and  to  concentrate  the  interview 
sessions  on  the  post-Kerr  years.  Another  very  special  appendix  is  a 
selection  from  John  Whinnery 's  poems,  which  reveal  the  many  facets  of 
this  eminent  scientist/engineer. 

After  an  initial  planning  meeting  with  Professor  Whinnery,  we 
embarked  on  a  series  of  seven  two-hour  interview  sessions,  which  took 
place  in  his  Cory  Hall  office  from  January  to  March,  1994.   It  was 
immediately  apparent  that  this  much-honored  scholar  and  universally 
admired  educator  is  a  genuinely  modest  person,  uncomfortable  talking 
about  himself  and  his  accomplishments.   Although  he  is  a  man  who  does  not 
waste  words,  his  comments  were  carefully  considered  and  they  provide 
insights  on  a  wide  range  of  topics  from  guiding  graduate  students,  to  the 
use  of  visualization  in  analyzing  research  problems,  to  the  interplay 
between  industry  and  the  university,  to  his  chairmanship  of  the  Four- 
Letter  Word  Committee  during  the  Free  Speech  Movement.   I  regretted  that 
I  lacked  the  scientific  background  to  pursue  in  depth  topics  relating  to 
his  seminal  research  in  electrical  engineering,  but  know  that  his 
reflections  here  will  be  of  interest  to  the  generalist  and  the  list  of 
publications  in  Appendix  C  will  guide  the  specialist. 

The  transcripts  of  the  tape-recorded  interviews  were  lightly  edited 
for  clarity  and  continuity  by  editorial  assistant  Shannon  Page. 
Professor  Whinnery  then  made  a  careful  and  thorough  review,  clarifying 
some  passages,  adding  names  and  dates  and  providing  further  information 
where  needed.   In  numerous  instances  he  despaired  of  the  spoken  word  and 
rewrote  brief  sections  to  make  them  clearer  and  more  concise. 
Unfailingly,  these  sections  provided  more  information,  never  did  they 
remove  essential  material.  We  appreciate  his  careful  work  on  the 
transcript.   The  final  corrected  text  was  proofed  and  indexed  by  editor 
Germaine  LaBerge,  with  additional  final  proofing  by  the  always  helpful 
former  University  Archivist  Jim  Kantor.   Tapes  of  the  interview  sessions 
can  be  consulted  in  The  Bancroft  Library,  along  with  the  John  Whinnery 
papers. 

The  oral  history  of  John  Whinnery  complements  a  number  of  other 
oral  histories  in  our  University  History  Series  which  document  the 


vi 


various  colleges,  professional  schools,  and  disciplines  on  the  Berkeley 
campus  and  their  role  in  the  development  of  Berkeley's  reputation  as  the 
major  public  research  university  in  the  nation.   We  thank  the  College  of 
Engineering  and  its  generous  contributors  for  providing  funding  for  this 
oral  history,  and  offer  special  thanks  to  Don  Pederson  for  the  graceful 
and  informative  introduction  to  the  volume. 

The  Regional  Oral  History  Office  was  established  in  1954  to  record 
the  lives  of  persons  who  have  contributed  significantly  to  the  history  of 
California  and  the  West.   The  office  is  a  division  of  The  Bancroft 
Library  and  is  under  the  direction  of  Willa  K.  Baum. 


Ann  Lage 
Interviewer /Editor 


November  15,  1995 

Regional  Oral  History  Office 

The  Bancroft  Library 

University  of  California,  Berkeley 


vii 


Regional  Oral  History  Office 
Room  486  The  Bancroft  Library 


University  of  California 
Berkeley,  California  94720 


BIOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION 
(Please  write  clearly.   Use  black  ink.) 


Your  full  name 


~Je  l* 


s  h  '  »  "  *•  * 


Date  of  birth       ~3il<]    2<+)    /?/£  _     Birthplace 
Father's   full  name          Rd-ll,     l>'/Mctnf' 


Occupation  _  fQr/nt.'' 


Birthplace    J<l  qu  oc.  tu  •, 


Mother's   full  name        £<//+t. 


Occupation  &'cn<~l  in    (rv-i~  g 
Your  spouse  _  '"Pp.6'ri'cta. 


Birthplace     <—  g 


Occupation 


Birthplace      C? 


Your  children       Can-< 


i-f          Ca  /X./-^t 


X.". 


Where  did  you  grow  up? 
Present  community  (^'' 
Education 


fa 


n  (J<.tn  >' 


/&•*/. 


,  Cf-f  (,w 


UC 


(Ph.  P.  ' 


Occupation(s) 


Areas  of  expertise 


/  cr- 


.  /-r-o  st*  *  4 


Other  interests  or  activities 

h''K./n*i.  <3o-t/- 
"/i  J  V 


a* 


Organizations  in  which  you  are  active 


I   FAMILY  BACKGROUND  AND  EDUCATION,  1916  TO  1937 


[Interview  1:   January  19,  1994]  it1 


Parents  and  Grandparents  in  Western  Colorado,  1870s  to  1916 


Lage:      We're  going  to  start  with  personal  background,  because  we  want 
to  get  some  sense  of  the  things  that  shaped  you  and  how  your 
interests  developed,  and  your  skills  and  proclivities.   I  want 
to  go  into  it  as  leisurely  as  we  can,  to  get  a  real  sense  of 
what  your  boyhood  was  like.   Shall  we  start,  though,  with  your 
family  background? 

Whinnery:   All  right. 

Lage:      I  know  you  started  out  in  Colorado,  but  how  did  your  parents  get 
there? 

Whinnery:   My  grandparents  on  both  sides  came  to  Colorado  from  the  Midwest. 
My  father's  family  came  first  from  Ohio  and  then  Kansas,  then  to 
Saguache,  Colorado,  and  then  to  Lake  City,  because  of  the  gold 
and  silver  mining  boom  in  Colorado.   This  grandfather,  John  E. 
Whinnery,  was  a  Civil  War  veteran.   Following  the  death  of  his 
first  wife,  he  married  Mary  Ann  Fawcett,  who  moved  west  with 
him. 

Lage:      When  would  that  have  been? 

Whinnery:   It  was  actually  before  Colorado  was  a  state,  I  think  about  two 
years  before.   So  what  would  that  be?  About  1874. 

Lage:      Was  that  part  of  a  gold  and  silver  rush? 


'##  This  symbol  indicates  that  a  tape  or  tape  segment  has  begun  or 
ended.   A  guide  to  the  tapes  follows  the  transcript. 


Whinnery:   Yes.   Not  as  well  known  a  rush  as  the  one  in  California.   Some 
of  George  Stewart ' s  books  tell  about  the  Colorado  gold  and 
silver  rush,  too.   So  they  settled  in  Lake  City,  Colorado,  where 
there  were  a  bunch  of  mines . 

Lage:      Was  that  eastern  or  western  Colorado? 

Whinnery:   It's  western  Colorado,  west  of  the  Continental  Divide. 

Lage:      And  mountainous. 

Whinnery:   Very  mountainous.   My  father's  family  didn't  do  very  well  in  the 
mines  but  finally  got  a  ranch  and  were  among  the  first  to  start 
cattle  raising  in  that  area. 

Lage:      So  they  quickly  learned  that  the  gold  and  silver  wasn't  always 
what  was  practical? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   My  father  [Ralph  Vincent  Whinnery]  didn't  have  much  formal 
education.   I  think  he  got  through  the  eighth  grade  but  did  not 
go  to  high  school.   But  he  showed  an  extreme  interest  in 
electricity  and  worked  in  the  light  plant,  the  water-operated 
light  plant  for  Lake  City.   His  brother  tells  about  how  he  tried 
on  the  farm  to  electrify  the  cream  separators.   In  fact,  this 
brother,  Webster,  called  Webb,  who  was  really  quite  a  character 
and  lived  to  be  102,  said  once,  "John,  I  do  really  believe  your 
father  discovered  electricity  right  here  in  Colorado."  Which  of 
course  was  obviously  not  true. 

Lage:      But  did  he  truly  believe  it,  or  was  he  just--? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know.   [laughter]   That  was  when  he  was  about  100  years 
old,  so  he  may  have  convinced  himself. 

Lage:      What  time  period  would  this  have  been,  when  your  father  had  this 
job  with  the  light  plant? 

Whinnery:   It  would  have  been  in  the  1890s. 

Lage:      These  were  the  early  days  of  electricity. 

Whinnery:   Well,  not  really.   Much  of  Edison's  work  was  before  that,  also 
Siemens  in  Germany,  and  others.   But  it  was  early  for  western 
Colorado.   And  then  there  was  a  government  program  for 
home stead ing  land,  and  the  family  bought  160  acres  on  the 
Gunnison  River,  near  Read.   This  little  town  of  Read,  which  you 
cannot  find  on  most  maps  anymore,  is  near  Delta,  Colorado,  at 
only  5,000  feet  elevation.   Lake  City  was  probably  8,000  or 
more.   My  father  later  moved  down  to  Read  and  farmed  there. 


Lage:      Did  his  family  homestead,  or  did  each  of  the  children  homestead 
their  own? 

Whinnery:   From  my  sister's  writings,  I  understand  that  the  family  did  the 
homesteading,  but  then  gave  one  part  to  the  daughter,  Eva,  who 
was  then  married  to  Emerson  Seely,  and  one  part  to  my  father. 
Webb  took  the  ranch  up  in  the  Powder  Horn  area  near  Lake  City. 

Lage:      So  he  stayed  with  the  cattle  ranching? 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      And  your  father  moved  to  farming? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  although  he  also  ran  a  small  store  and  the  post  office  at 
Read  for  a  while. 

Lage:      What  had  your  father's  family  done  before  they  came  out  to  the 
mines?   Do  you  know  that? 

Whinnery:   There  was  some  sort  of  an  argument  over  land  in  Ohio  when  they 
left  there  and  started  west,  and  like  a  lot  of  people  who  moved 
west  in  that  period,  they  didn't  keep  too  close  ties  with  the 
family  back  home,  so  I  know  little  of  the  background  there.   In 
Kansas  it  was  farming,  but  they  found  it  very  difficult  and  so 
decided  to  move  on. 

Lage:      Sounds  like  a  fairly  typical  journey  out  to  the  West. 
Whinnery:   Yes.   They  came  out  on  covered  wagons. 
Lage:      Did  your  father  talk  about  that? 

Whinnery:   He  was  a  very  quiet  person,  and  talked  only  really  when  asked. 

And  1  didn't  have  much  interest  in  family  history  at  that  stage, 
unfortunately.   He  was  actually  born  in  Colorado,  in  Saguache, 
which  was  the  first  place  they  settled  before  they  moved  to  Lake 
City,  so  didn't  experience  the  trip  west.   He  did  tell  stories 
about  his  work  in  the  Lake  City  light  plant,  and  about  his 
experience  in  the  Pitkin  Guards,  confronting  striking  miners. 

My  mother's  [Edith  Mabel  Bent]  family,  the  Bents,  came  to 
Lake  City  from  Oswego,  Kansas,  in  1877,  attracted  to  Colorado  by 
the  mines.   They  were  somewhat  more  successful.   At  least  one  of 
the  mines  that  they  developed,  the  "Dawn  of  Hope,"  sold  for 
$20,000,  which  I  guess  was  a  fair  amount  of  change  in  those 
days.   My  mother's  father,  Charles  Hammond  Bent,  was  a  lawyer, 
and  was  in  the  state  legislature  of  Colorado. 


Lage:      He  must  have  had  better  luck  with  the  mining. 

Whinnery:   Financially,  yes.   But  he  died  of  silicosis,  which  was 
attributed  to  his  activities  in  the  mines. 

Lage:      Had  he  been  a  lawyer  back  east? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   He  studied  law  at  the  Lowville  Academy  and  Antwerp 

Institute  in  New  York  state  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in 
Kansas  in  1867. 

Lage:      Did  you  know  your  grandfather? 

Whinnery:   No.   The  only  grandparent  that  I  knew  was  my  mother's  mother, 
Amanda  Jane  Carr  Bent.   She  actually  lived  with  us  for  quite  a 
few  years  on  the  farm  near  Read. 

Lage:      Did  your  mother  have  brothers  and  sisters? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   She  had  two  brothers,  Earl  and  Bert  [Herbert].   My  cousin, 
Ralph  Bent,  has  written  a  history  not  only  of  the  Bent  family 
but  of  the  Carrs  and  others  that  were  his  ancestors. 

Lage:      Do  you  know  what  you  know  about  them  from  your  cousin's  work,  or 
from  things  your  mother  told  you? 

Whinnery:   Much  of  the  detail  is  from  Ralph's  writings.   My  mother  also 

didn't  talk  a  lot  about  the  family  unless  the  occasion  came  up, 
but  she  did  more  than  my  father,  and  when  I  really  began  to  be 
interested,  I  asked  her  more  questions.   I  felt  badly  that  I 
didn't  take  a  recorder  and  record  some  of  the  stories. 

Lage:      Had  she  had  much  education? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   She  went  at  least  into  high  school.   I  think  she  graduated 
from  high  school,  so  she  had  more  years  of  school  than  my 
father. 

Lage:      Was  the  grandfather  being  in  the  state  legislature  an  important 
position? 

Whinnery:  Oh,  yes.   He  was  considered  a  top  citizen  of  the  area. 

Lage:  Would  that  have  made  her  go  to  the  capital? 

Whinnery:  I  don't  remember  her  saying  that  she  went  to  Denver. 

Lage:  I'm  sure  it  wasn't  a  full-time  legislature. 


Whinnery:   No,  it  was  not  full-time.   And  he  had  other  positions  in  Lake 

City,  including  county  commissioner.   Bent  Peak,  near  Carson,  is 
named  for  him,  according  to  Ralph's  account. 

Lage:      I  think  what  you  remember  about  it  might  be  the  most  important 
thing . 

Whinnery:  My  father  was  first  married  to  a  Swedish  girl  and  had  two 

daughters,  Irene  and  Argenta.   His  first  wife  died.   He  had 
actually  known  my  mother  before.   My  mother  was  then  living  in 
California,  near  San  Jose,  with  her  mother.   Her  father  had  died 
by  that  time. 

Lage:      Oh,  and  they  moved  out  to  California? 

Whinnery:   She  was  in  an  abstract  office  in  the  San  Jose  area. 

Lage:      What's  an  abstract  office? 

Whinnery:   It's  where  they  record  deeds.   Abstracts,  I  guess,  are  short 
descriptions  of  the  property. 

Lage:      When  would  that  have  been? 

Whinnery:   She  was  there  during  the  1906  earthquake;  their  house  was 
knocked  off  its  foundation.   So  it  was  around  then. 

Lage:      And  then  how  did  she  get  back  to  Lake  City? 

Whinnery:   After  my  father's  first  wife  died,  he  wrote  to  her,  and  they 
carried  on  quite  a  correspondence.   I  guess  he  visited  her  in 
California  at  least  once,  and  they  agreed  to  be  married.   Then 
they  moved  back  to  Read,  Colorado,  not  Lake  City. 

Lage:      My  goodness.   So  she  always  had  had  that  California  experience 
that  may  have  shaped  things  later,  do  you  think? 

Whinnery:   Well,  I  don't  know  that  it  had  much  to  do  with  that.   It  was 
really  my  father's  decision,  when  he  had  such  poor  health,  to 
try  California.  But  her  early  experience  here  may  have  helped 
the  decision. 

Lage:      Then  did  your  grandmother  come  back  at  that  time  with  her  from 
California? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  she  came  back  also  and  lived  with  us  at  Read. 
Lage:      So  your  mother  raised  your  two  half-sisters? 


Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      How  old  were  they? 

Whinnery:   I  think  Argenta  was  only  three  or  four,  and  Irene  was  five  or 
six. 

Lage:      Your  father  needed  a  wife,  it  sounds  like.   Two  little  girls. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Argenta,  unfortunately,  died  as  a  teenager  from  a  heart 

problem.   She  was  a  lovely  person,  as  I  remember  her.   My  sister 
Irene  is  living  in  Modesto,  but  unfortunately  she  is  very  ill 
right  now.1 

Lage:      What  did  she  go  on  to  do?   Did  she  marry,  or  did  she  have  a 
career? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes,  she  married  and  has  four  children,  Shirlee,  Marcia, 

John,  and  Steven.   Two  are  living  in  Modesto,  and  one  in  the  Los 
Angeles  area.   Marcia  was  in  Michigan  but  died  a  few  years  ago. 


Family  and  Boyhood  in  Read.  Colorado 


Lage:      Tell  me  a  little  about  growing  up  in  Read,  which  isn't  even  on 
the  map  anymore.   That's  kind  of  intriguing. 

Whinnery:   Well,  the  interesting  thing  is  that  I  can't  remember  much  about 
the  school  at  all,  other  than  it  was  a  three-room  school  with 
first,  second,  and  third  grades  in  the  first  room,  fourth, 
fifth,  and  sixth  in  the  second  room,  and  seventh  and  eighth  in 
the  third  room. 

I  can  remember  a  few  incidents.   I  hated  spelling  bees. 
They  had  arithmetic  competitions  the.  same  way,  with  speed 
arithmetic. 

Lage:      Did  you  like  those? 

Whinnery:   No,  I  hated  both  of  them.   [laughter]   But  aside  from  that,  I 
don't  remember  the  teachers  or  much  of  what  we  studied. 

Lage:      Do  you  remember  enjoying  going  to  school,  or  did  the  spelling 
and  arithmetic  bees  turn  you  off? 


'Deceased  February,  1994. 


Whinnery:   No,  I  don't  remember  hating  it  or  being  thrilled  with  it. 


Father's  Light  Plant  in  Austin 


Whinnery:   Again,  a  very  significant  thing  was  that  my  father  decided  to 
buy  a  light  plant  for  the  town  of  Austin.   Now,  Austin  is  a 
little  bit  bigger  than  Read,  but  not  much.   They  must  have  had 
about  two  dozen  houses  or  something  like  that.   So  he  tried  to 
buy  this  little  water-powered  light  plant  that  was  to  serve  it. 
As  far  as  I  know,  he  probably  was  doing  it  on  trial  basis, 
because  he  did  this  only  for  two  years.   This  was  before  I 
started  school  but  I  remember  it  more  vividly  than  many  things 
later.1 

But  anyway,  we  moved  up  near  the  light  plant,  and  that  was 
one  of  the  most  exciting  things  to  me,  to  watch  the  turbines  and 
the  generators.   And  the  problem  with  the  water,  which  came  down 
by  ditches,  was  that  the  prairie  dogs  would  dig  holes  in  the 
ditches,  and  everybody  would  be  out  of  power  for  a  while. 

Lage:      It  wasn't  on  a  river?   It  was  on  a  man-made  ditch? 

Whinnery:   No,  it  was  on  a  man-made  ditch.   All  of  that  area  was  irrigated. 
Water  came  from  the  Gunnison  River  through  a  series  of  ditches . 
The  Relief  Ditch  was  the  one  that  our  farm  was  irrigated  by.   I 
don't  know  whether  the  ditch  for  the  power  plant  came  out  of 
that,  but  in  any  event,  I  remember  walking  along  looking  for  the 
prairie  dog  holes.   Sometimes  we'd  have  to  do  it  at  night  with  a 
flashlight.   I  suppose  that  attraction  had  something  to  do  again 
with  my  later  interest  in  electricity. 

My  father  was  always  interested  in  machinery.   He  was  a 
very  fine  craftsman,  carpenter,  blacksmith.   He  would  take  the 
Model  T  car  apart  every  year  in  the  spring,  and  spread  it  all 
out,  clean  every  part,  and  put  it  back  together. 

Lage:      Did  you  participate  with  him,  doing  things  like  this? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  I  watched,  I  suppose.   Some  of  the  time  I  guess  I  was  too 
young  to  be  very  helpful,  but  I  recall  that  at  least  once  he 
made  a  toy  car  that  I  could  take  apart  while  he  was  working  on 
the  real  one. 


'See  Professor  Whinnery 's  poem  "Light  (and  Cider)  for  Austin"  and 
others  on  western  Colorado  in  Appendix  B. 


Lage:      You  could  see  some  of  the  beginnings  then. 

Whinnery:   So  I'm  sure  that  his  love  of  machines  and  his  being  not  too 
enthusiastic  about  f arming- - 

Lage:      He  did  this  while  he  farmed? 

Whinnery:   Well,  even  though  he  worked  very,  very  hard,  there  would  be 

periods  between  crops.   In  haying,  there  were  three  cuttings  of 
the  alfalfa  with  periods  in  between.  Always  in  the  summer  he 
would  try  to  get  one  period  away  to  go  fishing. 

Lage:      Did  he  take  you  fishing?  Was  this  part  of  your  life,  too? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   Again,  I  wasn't  a  very  skillful  fisherman.   By  the 
time  I  was  nine  or  ten,  the  time  we  left,  I  should  have  been. 

Lage:      Did  you  like  the  outdoors? 
Whinnery:   Very  much. 

Lage:      Was  this  something  that  you  think  had  an  influence,  living  out 
in  that  beauty? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   One  of  the  strong  memories  is  of  Grand  Mesa,  which  is 
a  beautiful  10,000-foot  high  flat  top  mountain  with  over  100 
lakes.   We'd  also  go  up  around  Lake  City,  Creede,  or  Gunnison. 
Those  are  certainly  some  of  my  strongest  and  fondest  memories. 

Lage:      Sometimes  you  think  that  only  the  people  who  have  grown  up  in 
the  city  and  then  go  for  vacations  really  appreciate  the 
grandeur  of  the  mountains,  but  it  sounds  like  living  there,  that 
was  something  consciously  appreciated  at  the  time. 

Whinnery:   Oh,  I'm  sure,  yes.   As  a  kid,  you  don't  know  what  else  there  is, 
so  I  don't  know  that  I  appreciated  it  in  the  same  way  as  a  city 
dweller.   I  did  later,  going  into  the  Sierra  from  here. 


Life  in  a  Small  Community 


Lage:      Tell  me  something  about  how  your  home  was  set  up.   Did  you  have 
electricity  in  the  home? 

Whinnery:   No.   My  dad  had  generators  and  would  make  arc  lights  and  would 

show  magic  lantern  shows,  but  in  the  house  we  just  used  kerosene 
lamps . 


Lage:      So  he  provided  electricity  for  Austin,  but  Read  didn't  have  a 
source  of  it? 


Whinnery:   No. 

Lage:      What  about  a  radio?  Did  you  have  a  radio? 

Whinnery:   No.   I  remember  when  my  aunt  and  uncle  got  a  radio,  but  we 

didn't  have  a  radio  at  any  time  in  Colorado.   The  only  telephone 
line  went  from  our  house  to  this  aunt's  house,  and  they  had  a 
connection  to  Delta. 

Lage:      Do  you  remember  being  excited  by  the  radio  when  you  were  exposed 
to  it  finally? 

Whinnery:   A  little  bit.   Of  course,  mostly  what  you  heard  was  static.   You 
could  hear  some  voices  coming  through,  and  some  music.   But  it 
wasn ' t  tremendous . 

Lage:      Was  the  static  because  of  your  location,  or  because  of  the 
quality  of  the  radios  at  that  time? 

Whinnery:   Both.   I  don't  know  where  the  stations  were,  but  they  probably 
were  somewheres  away,  and  the  radios  at  that  stage  were 
primitive. 

Lage:      Now,  how  big  was  Read?  Austin  sounds  pretty  small,  and  Read  is 
even  smaller? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   It  was  listed  in  the  census,  I  think,  as  having  eighty- 
seven  people,  but  they  counted  all  the  farms  within  a  several- 
mile  radius.   Read  itself  was  a  store,  a  station,  a  meeting 
house,  and  a  school  at  that  time.   There  was  a  train  which 
actually  went  through  our  farm  on  its  way  to  the  coal  mines 
around  Somerset.   The  eighty-seven  people  of  Read,  I  suppose, 
would  be  from  a  dozen  or  more  ranches  or  farms. 

Lage:      Did  they  gather  very  often?  Were  there  social  occasions? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   The  meeting  hall  which  served  also  as  a  church  was  the 
center  of  it.   In  addition  to  Sunday  services,  they  had  church 
socials. 

Lage:      Is  that  something  that  was  important? 

Whinnery:   It  was  certainly  important  to  the  community,  yes. 

Lage:      Was  your  family  religious? 


10 

Whinnery:   My  mother  was  quite  religious.   My  father  came  out  of  a  Quaker 

background,  and  I  think  in  his  own  way  he  was,  but  he  did  not  go 
to  the  local  church.   Later  when  we  moved  to  Modesto,  my  mother 
became  active  in  the  Baptist  church,  and  he  did  not. 

Lage:      Did  your  mother  read  the  Bible? 
Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   She  was  very  deeply  religious. 
Lage:      How  about  politics?  Was  this  discussed? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Uncle  Webb  was  known  as  "Mr.  Republican"  in  Gunnison.   My 
father  certainly  was  Republican,  but  he  was  not 
ultraconservative . 

Lage:      Did  they  follow  the  national  politics,  or  were  they  mainly 
interested  in  what  was  going  on  in  Colorado? 

Whinnery:   I  think  in  both.   Certainly  at  the  time  of  presidential 
elections,  there  would  be  discussion  of  candidates. 

Lage:      How  about  your  mother?  Was  she  interested?   She  must  have  been, 
with  her  father  having  been  involved. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  but  she  didn't  talk  about  politics  as  much.   But  I'm  sure 
she  voted  about  the  same  way. 

Lage:      I  wonder  what  drew  them  to  the  Republicans  at  that  time?   Do  you 
remember? 

Whinnery:  I'm  not  entirely  sure.  Whether  it  was  started  before  they  came 
to  Colorado  or  not,  a  lot  would  depend  upon  the  role  of  the  two 
parties  in  the  development  of  Colorado.  But  I'm  not  sure. 

Lage:      Money  policy  always  seemed  important.   Silver  and  money  policy 
and  all  of  that. 

Whinnery:   It  could  be. 

Lage:      Was  the  mining  industry  still  a  big  factor  in  the  area? 

Whinnery:   It  was  certainly  on  its  way  down  when  I  was  growing  up.   There 
are  still  some  mines  operating  there,  I  believe,  but  the  boom 
period  had  passed. 

Lage:      It  seems  like  farming  wasn't  too  lucrative. 

Whinnery:   No,  certainly  this  was  a  sub -marginal  farm.   Later,  when  a  sugar 
beet  plant  was  built  in  Delta,  it  was  better,  but  before  that, 


11 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 


if  you  had  a  good  crop,  everybody  had  a  good  crop  and  you  could 
hardly  sell  it.   This  valley  was  so  far  from  markets,  for  one 
thing.   If  the  prices  were  right,  it  was  because  no  one  had  a 
good  crop.   But  when  the  sugar  beets  came  in,  it  stabilized  a 
bit,  but  still  survival  was  just  marginal. 

What  kinds  of  things  did  your  father  grow? 

Before  that,  he  hated  onions,  but  he  grew  some  onions,  and  there 
was  one  year  that  a  plant  came  in  to  make  pumpkin  flour  for 
pumpkin  pies.   We  grew  pumpkins,  and  that  was  fine,  we  had  a  lot 
of  pumpkins,  trekked  them  in  to  Delta.   But  the  place  went 
bankrupt,  and  we  never  got  paid  for  them.   So  that  was  sort  of 
the  story  of  farming  before  sugar  beets. 

I  seem  to  remember  stories  about  sugar  beets,  and  how  arduous  it 
is  to  farm  them.   Is  that  something  that  you  had  to  do? 

The  hard  part  was  thinning  the  beets,  but  also  hoeing  later  for 
the  weeds.   But  for  thinning  beets,  we  actually  had  to  be  on 
hands  and  knees.   Seeds  would  be  planted  in  a  row,  and  they 
would  come  up  close  together.   You  would  take  a  hoe  and  take  out 
one  patch  of  the  small  seedlings  but  then  there  would  be  maybe 
half  a  dozen  left  in  a  little  packet,  and  you  had  to  pick  out 
all  but  one.   This  adobe  ground  was  very  seldom  just  the  right 
consistency  to  get  things  out  easily,  and  your  knees  would  get 
sore,  and  your  fingers  would  hurt. 

Did  your  sisters  and  mother  also  work? 

Oh,  yes. 

Did  you  ever  hire  people,  or  was  this  just  the  family? 

The  only  time  we  hired  people  was  for  threshing  of  wheat.   This 
was  one  of  the  other  crops  we  had  before  sugar  beets.   There 
would  be  a  crew  that  would  go  around  from  one  farm  to  another 
with  the  threshing  machine.   But  other  than  that,  we  didn't  have 
any  hired  hands. 

Was  that  a  big  part  of  your  life,  the  amount  of  work  you  did  on 
the  farm?  Did  you  have  a  lot  of  chores  on  the  farm? 

Yes,  after  I  was  old  enough  to  be  useful.  We  left  when  I  was 
about  ten,  so  there  was  a  period  of  four  or  five  years  when  I 
could  be  helpful. 


Would  it  have  been  summertime? 
kind  of  thing? 


Did  school  relieve  you  from  that 


12 


Whinnery:   Well,  some  of  the  chores,  like  feeding  the  hogs  and  the  cattle, 
had  to  be  done  every  day.   In  fact,  wintertime  was  the  hardest 
time.   I  didn't  do  much  milking;  Mother  did  most  of  that.   I 
remember  her  out  in  the  cold  and  snowy  weather. 

Lage:      It  doesn't  sound  like  an  easy  life  at  all. 

Whinnery:   No,  it  was  a  very  tough  life,  particularly  for  my  father  and 

mother.   They  worked  very  hard,  and  several  difficult  incidents 
came  up.   Of  course,  the  very  sad  one  was  Argenta's  death. 

Lage:      Did  that  occur  in  Colorado? 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      And  then  your  father  was  ill  also. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   When  he  died  of  pneumonia,  the  doctor  believed  that  his 

problem  was  chronic  leukemia  and  that  was  the  cause  of  his  long 
time  illness.  We  were  never  sure  of  the  diagnosis,  since  it  was 
only  an  opinion  after  his  death. 


The  Ten-Dollar  Pig 


Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Oh,  I  have  to  tell  you  one  thing  about  why  I  didn't  like 
fanning,  in  addition  to  thinning  the  sugar  beets.   They  felt  in 
school  that  we  should  join  the  Future  Farmers  of  America. 
Everybody  was  presumably  going  to  be  a  farmer.   They  made  us  buy 
a  pig.   It  had  to  be  a  thoroughbred  pig,  so  a  ten-dollar  pig. 
Ten  dollars  was  a  lot  of  money  in  those  days.   And  it  couldn't 
be  in  the  pigpen  with  the  others ;  it  had  to  have  a  nice  clean 
place,  and  it  couldn't  be  fed  slops,  it  had  to  have  special  pig 
food.   That  pig  died  on  my  birthday.   [laughter] 


Oh!   Your  special,  cared-for  pig! 
have  been? 


Which  birthday  would  that 


Oh,  gosh,  I  don't  know.   I  suppose  about  eight  or  something  like 
that. 

So  you  were  getting  a  taste  of  scientific  farming,  and  in  a 
sense,  it  didn't  work  too  well. 

The  interesting  thing  is  I  don't  remember  whether  the  people  in 
charge  of  the  program  ever  came  and  figured  out  why  the  pig 
died.   I  would  think  they  should  have. 


13 


Lage:      Yes.   Well,  they  weren't  educating  you  to  be  an  electrical 
engineer. 

Whinnery:   No. 

Lage:      They  didn't  really  expect  that  of  any  of  their  students, 
probably. 

Whinnery:   No.   I  think  some  of  the  teachers  were  encouraging  me,  and 

because  of  what  my  dad  did,  I  said  I  wanted  to  be  a  mechanic.   I 
didn't  know  anything  about  electrical  engineers  at  that  stage. 

Lage:      So  you  had  voiced  this  even  back  in  Colorado? 
Whinnery:   Yes. 


Family  Pastimes  and  Holidays  #// 


Lage:      Was  your  father  realistic  enough  about  farming  to  hope  that  you 
would  get  out  of  it,  or  do  you  remember  any  discussions  along 
those  lines? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  really  remember. 

One  other  thing  about  that  period  that  might  be  interesting 
is  that  on  long  winter  nights,  my  family  read  aloud.   Of  course 
there  wasn't  any  radio  or  television.   They  read  the  Tarzan 
books,  and  Jules  Verne's  Mysterious  Island,  and  Swiss  Family 
Robinson,  books  of  that  nature.   My  dad  liked  Victor  Hugo  very 
much,  but  I  don't  remember  their  reading  that  aloud. 

Lage:      Was  this  a  group  activity? 

Whinnery:   I  think  it  was  mostly  my  father  and  mother  reading.   I  often  had 
to  go  to  bed  before  they  finished,  so  I  had  these  stories 
sometimes  mixed  up. 

Lage:      [laughs]   I  would  think  so.   So  they  weren't  reading  to  you, 
just  to  each  other? 

Whinnery:   No,  it  was  reading  to  the  family,  and  my  sisters  were  there. 

Lage:      Do  you  know  if,  among  the  other  families  in  the  area,  that  was  a 
common  kind  of  entertainment? 


14 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know.   I  would  guess  it  wasn't  universal,  but  probably 
others  did  it. 

Lage:      Was  music  a  part  of  your  life  at  all? 

Whinnery:   My  mother  taught  piano,  but  for  some  reason,  whether  I  wasn't 
interested  or  didn't  have  the  aptitude,  I  didn't  learn  to  play 
anything.   I  loved  to  listen  to  music. 

Lage:  Would  she  play  for  the  family? 

Whinnery:  She  played  in  church,  but  not  much  just  for  the  family. 

Lage:  Did  she  have  a  piano  at  home? 

Whinnery:  Yes,  she  had  a  piano.   I  think  all  of  her  pupils  were  girls. 

Lage:  I  wonder  if  it  was  thought  of  as  a  girls'  occupation. 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know.   But  I  remember  teasing  the  girls  when  they  came, 
but  otherwise  I  didn't  get  in  on  the  lessons. 

Lage:      Did  your  dad  hunt? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  think  I  mentioned  in  one  of  the  verses  about  going  to 
Cedaredge  for  cedar  trees  for  Christmas.1  We'd  always  take 
along  a  gun  and  try  to  get  some  rabbits.   I  don't  remember  that 
he  went  deer  hunting. 

Lage:      Doesn't  sound  like  a  big  part  of  his  life. 

Whinnery:   No. 

Lage:      What  was  Christmas  like? 

Whinnery:   All  the  holidays,  the  Fourth  of  July  and  Christmas  and 

Thanksgiving,  were  really  quite  festive.   My  mother  would  make 
all  the  kinds  of  candy  for  the  week  ahead- -fudge,  fondant, 
panoche,  divinity. 

Lage:      Did  family  get  together?  Did  your  mother's  family  come,  and 
your  father's? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   All  the  relatives  in  that  area  would  get  together  on 
all  of  these  holidays. 


"'A  Child's  Christmas  in  Read,"  Appendix  B. 


15 


Lage:      Was  Fourth  of  July  a  kind  of  civic  affair  in  Read? 

Whinnery:   My  father  loved  it  and  would  get  fireworks.   1  remember  people 
coming  in,  and  those  would  be  some  of  the  times  he  would  also 
put  on  these  lantern  shows.  The  only  thing  that  bothered  me,  my 
dog  just  hated  it,  and  he  would  disappear  just  as  soon  as  he 
heard  the  first  firecracker.   The  parades  and  civic  activities 
were  in  Delta. 

Lage:  Now,  were  the  lantern  shows  slides,  photographic  slides? 

Whinnery:  Yes.   They  were  not  like  our  35-millimeter,  but  larger. 

Lage:  Glass? 

Whinnery:  Yes. 

Lage:  Did  your  father  take  those  pictures,  or  did  he  buy  them? 

Whinnery:   He  had  pictures  of  scenic  places  around  the  world,  but  I  think 
he  bought  them. 

Lage:      It  sure  is  amazing,  when  you  think  of  how  the  relatively  short 
time  things  have  changed,  from  the  magic  lantern  show  being  a 
novelty,  to  television. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  that's  right. 

Lage:      Quite  amazing.   Do  your  children  ask  you  about  what  it  was  like 
to  grow  up  in  Read? 

Whinnery:   They're  somewhat  interested  in  the  family.   Our  oldest  daughter, 
Carol,  in  particular,  started  collecting  family  histories.   But 
I  guess  they  haven't  really  asked  me  much  about  the  individual 
events . 

Lage:      About  your  own  experience? 

Whinnery:   No.   They  seem  to  enjoy  it  when  sometimes  —  like  when  I  wrote 
those  verses,  and  certainly  when  my  sister  wrote  the  family 
history  as  she  remembered  it. 

Lage:      Did  your  sister  play  the  piano? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   She  doesn't  consider  herself  expert,  but  has  played 
regularly  for  her  Sunday  school  class. 


16 


The  Move  to  Modesto.  California.  1927.  and  Father's  Failing 
Health 


Lage:      Let's  find  out  about  Modesto,  and  why  you  moved  there. 
Whinnery:   My  father's  health  was  getting  worse  and  worse. 

Lage:      Was  he  just  getting  weaker  and  weaker,  or  was  he  diagnosed  as 
having  something? 

Whinnery:   The  doctor  in  Delta,  near  Read,  prescribed  some  medicines  for 
him,  but  I'm  not  sure  of  the  diagnosis.   After  he  died,  the 
Modesto  doctor  thought  his  problem  had  been  chronic  leukemia. 
In  any  event  the  winters  in  Colorado  had  become  increasingly 
difficult  for  him. 

So  one  winter,  about  1926,  when  I  was  ten  years  old,  he 
decided  to  pack  up  the  Model  T  Ford  and  try  Arizona  and 
California.   He  first  of  all  remodeled  the  Ford  so  it  was  almost 
a  camper  and  then  went  down  to  Phoenix  and  worked  in  the 
lettuce. 


Lage:      Did  he  go  by  himself,  or  was  this  with  the  family? 

Whinnery:  At  that  time,  my  sister  was  going  to  college  in  Gunnison,  so  it 
was  just  the  three  of  us:  my  mother,  father,  and  I.  They  both 
worked  in  the  lettuce  in  Phoenix  to  get  enough  money  to  go  on. 

Then  we  went  on  to  California,  finally  to  Modesto,  where 
some  former  neighbors  had  settled.   Then  he  worked  pruning  fruit 
trees  during  that  winter.   The  great  thing  about  it  was  that  I 
didn't  have  to  go  to  school  all  that  year. 

Lage:      What  did  you  do  while  they  were  working  in  the  lettuce  fields? 

Whinnery:   There  were  other  kids,  and  we  had  kids'  games,  I  guess.   There 
was  a  new  merry-go-round  in  Phoenix  which  they  let  us  ride  for 
free.   I  did  have  some  books  to  study  but  don't  remember 
spending  much  time  with  them. 

Lage:      Sounds  like  a  nice  interlude.   Did  it  bother  your  mother  or 

father  that  you  weren't  in  school?  Was  it  something  that  they 
were  worried  about? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know. 
Lage:      You  weren't! 


17 


Whinnery; 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


I  wasn't.   But  when  we  got  back,  they  tell  me  that  all  I  could 
talk  about  were  the  dams  that  we  saw  along  the  way.   We  did  see 
a  number  of  dams,  both  in  Arizona  and  California,  including  the 
Don  Pedro  Dam  near  Modesto.   So  I  suppose  that's  significant  in 
revealing  my  interests. 

Right.   So  you  were  nine  or  ten  then. 

I  was  about  ten,  I  guess. 

And  you  came  back  to  Colorado? 

Came  back  to  Colorado,  and  my  father  had  felt  so  much  better 
that  winter  that  he  decided  to  move  permanently.   The  next  fall 
we  returned  to  Modesto. 


Was  that  something  that  you  looked  forward  to? 
happy  to  be  leaving,  or  do  you  remember? 


Were  you  just  as 


I  don't  remember  being  either  sad  or  overjoyed.  I  suppose  I  was 
interested,  because  I  had  enjoyed  the  previous  year. 

Of  course,  that  meant  going  back  to  school. 

Yes.  I  first  went  to  the  Roosevelt  Junior  High,  starting  at  the 
seventh  grade,  in  Modesto,  and  then  the  Modesto  High  School.  As 
I  mentioned  in  my  note  to  you,  I  had  some  marvelous  teachers. 

Did  you  begin  to  enjoy  school  at  that  point,  do  you  think? 

I  don't  think  I  enjoyed  junior  high  very  much.  Part  of  the 

problem  was  that  I  was  very  shy  and  looked  like  a  hayseed  to  the 

other  students.   Some  of  them  were  pretty  mean,  not  physically 
me  an ,  but  t  aunt  ing . 

That's  junior  high,  isn't  it? 

Yes.   But  I  began  to  develop  friends  of  my  own,  and  by  the  time 
I  was  in  high  school,  had  some  close  friends.  Often  the 
friendships  came  about  because  of  the  classes  we  liked  together, 
the  math  and  science  classes.   I  really  did  enjoy  the  teachers, 
just  marvelous  teachers. 


18 


High  School  in  Modesto 


Teachers 


Lage:      Tell  me  about  some  of  the  teachers  that  may  have  been 
influential.   Do  you  recall  them  as  individuals? 

Whinnery:   For  geometry,  which  I  loved,  there  was  Miss  Brown.   The  French 
teacher,  Miss  Peron,  was  a  marvelous  person.   She  died  only  a 
few  years  ago. 

Lage:      Did  you  keep  in  touch  with  her? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  I  saw  her  in  Modesto  quite  often.   We  had  a  general  science 
teacher,  Mr.  Utter,  and  then  a  wonderful  chemistry  character, 
Willie  Brown.   He  would  tell  stories  about  his  safaris  in  Africa 
but  also  made  the  chemistry  sound  so  exciting.   When  he  got  to 
Madame  Curie  and  the  discovery  of  radium,  everybody  was  on  the 
edge  of  their  chairs,  the  way  he  told  the  story. 

Lage:      He  was  telling  you  about  the  development  of  chemistry  and--? 
Whinnery:   Yes,  but  also  we  had  the  chemistry  lab. 
Lage:      Did  all  this  really  intrigue  you? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   In  fact,  at  one  stage  I  was  going  to  be  a  chemist.   I 
don't  know  why  I  changed-- just  got  interested  in  a  variety  of 
things  at  different  times,  I  suppose. 

Denny  was  the  physics  teacher,  not  quite  as  inspiring  as 
the  others,  but  again,  I  liked  it.   And  in  English,  the 
marvelous  Barbara  Barrett.   I  also  had  her  again  after  she  moved 
from  the  high  school  to  junior  college.   She  encouraged  creative 
writing  and  made  literature  sound  exciting. 

Lage:      You  were  interested  in  the  humanities  as  well,  even  then? 

Whinnery:  Yes,  particularly  the  English  with  Miss  Barrett.   Some  history 
was  interesting,  but  I  don't  remember  that  as  well. 

Lage:      Do  you  remember  these  teachers  as  being  particularly  encouraging 
to  you  as  an  individual? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  many  were,  Miss  Barrett  in  particular.   In  fact,  jumping 

ahead  to  junior  college,  she  picked  out  two  or  three  of  us,  and 


19 


rather  than  having  us  sit  in  class  and  do  the  exercises,  she 
assigned  a  book  for  us  to  read  and  discuss  together. 

Lage:      The  three  of  you  together? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  and  then  we  would  have  to  write  a  composition  about  the 
book.   She  often  read  these  to  the  rest  of  the  class. 

Lage:      Did  you  ever  think  about  going  on  in  that  field,  when  you  were 
studying? 

Whinnery:   Not  seriously.   But  I  keep  intending  to  collect  some  of  the 
things  I  write  and  still  may,  some  day. 

Lage:      It's  always  been  an  interest,  it  sounds  like. 
Whinnery:   Yes. 


Friends ,  and  Hobbies 


Lage:      Do  you  have  any  recollection  of  how  inquisitive  you  were  about 
your  studies,  in  comparison  to  your  peers? 

Whinnery:   Well,  Don  Martin,  Vernon  Doslaugh,  and  John  Sardis  were  the 

three  friends  that  I  was  the  closest  to  during  this  period—we 
always  had  some  project  going.   Now,  as  I  look  back  on  it,  it 
sounds  terrible,  because  I  don't  think  we  ever  finished  any  of 
these. 

Lage:      What  kind  of  projects? 

Whinnery:   Building  a  radio,  making  a  telescope- -when  we  were  in  general 
science,  we  got  really  excited  about  astronomy,  and  we  were 
going  to  grind  the  lens  for  a  telescope.   And  in  chemistry,  we 
were  going  to  make  a  sulfuric  acid  plant. 

Lage:      That's  ambitious. 

Whinnery:   One  which  got  nearest  to  being  finished,  but  my  dad  did  a  lot  of 
it,  was  also  in  general  science;  it  was  building  a  miniature 
light  plant.  At  that  time,  we  were  on  a  farm  which  had  a  creek 
running  through  it,  so  we  built  a  dam  and  then  a  water  wheel, 
and  that  worked  all  right.  And  then  a  little  generator,  which 
my  dad  pretty  much  made.   And  then  we  were  going  to  make  a 
storage  battery,  charge  the  storage  battery  and  bring  it  back  up 
to  the  house,  but  we  never  got  that  far.   For  the  astronomy 


20 

project,  we  never  even  got  the  money  to  get  the  blank  to  start 
grinding  the  lens. 

Lage:      Because  these  things  all  did  take  money. 
Whinnery:   They  did. 

Lage:      Did  the  teachers  help  you  with  those,  or  was  it  on  your  own  and 
with  your  father? 

Whinnery:   I  particularly  remember  asking  Mr.  Utter  questions  about  the 

generator  and  the  telescope.   But  I  guess  most  of  it  was  on  our 
own. 

Lage:      That  seems  like  something  that's  pointing  to  your  later 
interest. 

Whinnery:   Oh,  I'm  sure  it  did.   But  I  am  embarrassed  to  think  that  I  was 
getting  excited  and  starting  so  many  projects,  but  didn't  seem 
to  get  many  of  them  finished.   Others  seemed  to  finish  fairly 
ambitious  projects. 

Lage:      When  you  say  other  people  were  finishing  them,  do  you  mean  other 
people  in  your  school? 

Whinnery:   Not  so  much  in  the  school.   For  telescope  makers,  there  was  a 
little  magazine  for  amateur  astronomers,  and  you'd  see  these 
pictures  of  persons  our  age  and  the  telescopes  they  had  made. 

Lage:      Probably  few  and  far  between  really  got  finished. 

Whinnery:   And  certainly  in  terms  of  amateur  radio,  there  were  a  lot  of 
"hams",  and  I  never  did  get  the  license. 

Lage:      Was  part  of  that  money  constraints  also? 

Whinnery:   Some  of  it  was,  because  when  we  were  trying  to  build  a  radio, 

we'd  try  to  pick  up  old  radios  and  take  parts  out  of  them.   But 
I  think  there  was  something  beyond  that. 


Family  Life  in  Modesto 


Lage:      How  did  your  mother  feel  about  all  your  interests?  Was  she 
encouraging  as  far  as  education  went? 

Whinnery:   She  wasn't  pushing  me  but  was  certainly  encouraging. 


21 


Lage:      She  hadn't  laid  out  a  goal  for  you  to  pursue  a  higher  education? 

Whinnery:   No. 

Lage:      Did  the  family  continue  their  evening  reading  in  Modesto? 

Whinnery:   Not  so  much.   By  that  time,  there  were  radios,  so  we  would 
listen  to  Amos  'n'  Andy  instead. 

Lage:      And  you  lived  on  a  farm  again? 

Whinnery:   We  did  for  a  couple  of  years.  My  brother-in-law  and  my  father 
were  going  to  try  to  buy  this  little  farm.  That  didn't  work, 
but  for  two  years  we  were  on  it  while  they  had  an  option  to  buy. 
Even  then,  my  father  was  working  in  the  pruning  and  picking 
fruit,  but  his  health  continued  to  decline,  and  after  a  few 
years,  he  couldn't  do  that.   So  my  mother  was  doing  housework 
and  such  things  to  get  most  of  the  family  income. 

Lage:      And  your  sister,  did  she  come  out  with  you,  or  stay? 

Whinnery:   My  sister  came  with  us  when  we  moved  permanently  to  Modesto. 
She  also  had  a  health  problem  and  had  to  give  up  the  college. 
She  came  out  and  got  married  shortly  after  that. 

Lage:      And  stayed  in  Modesto? 
Whinnery:   And  stayed  in  Modesto. 

Lage:      So  that's  probably  why  you  keep  your  tie  to  Modesto  and  have 
seen  the  teachers  over  the  years. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  high  school  class  has  a  reunion  every  five  years 

starting  with  the  twenty-fifth,  and  they  just  recently  had  their 
sixtieth,  but  I  probably  wouldn't  have  gone  to  many  of  them  if 
it  hadn't  been  for  my  family  being  there.   But  we  have  enjoyed 
them. 

Lage:      Do  those  three  special  friends  go  to  the  reunions? 

Whinnery:   Don  Martin  is  now  married  and  has  a  family  which  he  started  at 
age  fifty.   He  lives  in  Utah,  but  comes  to  nearly  all  of  these. 
John  Sardis  was  a  very  successful  structural  engineer,  but  died 
of  a  heart  attack  ten  or  more  years  ago.   But  until  then,  we 
kept  in  touch  regularly.   Vernon  Doslaugh  joined  the  navy  and 
after  a  time  we  lost  contact. 


Lage: 


Did  they  go  off  to  college? 


22 


Whinnery:   Sardis  graduated  as  a  civil  engineer  from  Berkeley,  and  Don 

Martin  is  from  the  chemistry  program  at  Berkeley.   I  think  he 
later  came  back  for  a  master's  degree.   I  don't  know  about 
Dos laugh. 

Lage:      Was  Berkeley  sort  of  a  common  route  for  the  people  in  Modesto 
who  were  going  on? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   At  that  time  UCLA  was  the  only  other  campus  of  the 

University  of  California,  and  did  not  have  engineering.   The 
junior  colleges  were  marvelous.   I  think  maybe  it  was  because  of 
the  depression  that  they  had  such  good  teachers. 

Lage:      That  has  an  effect,  doesn't  it,  the  economic  situation  of  the 
times . 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Well,  there  are  still  some  very  good  ones,  but  I  think 

it's  harder  for  them  to  keep  the  same  quality  now.   There's  so 
much  competition  with  the  state  colleges  and  universities. 

Lage:      And  they  also  probably  got  a  better  quality  student  then,  who 
couldn't  afford  to  go  on  to  four-year  schools? 

Whinnery:   That's  right. 


Modesto  Junior  College 


Lage:  You  went  to  Modesto  Junior  College? 

Whinnery:  Yes. 

Lage:  And  how  was  your  education  there? 

Whinnery:  Again,  just  marvelous. 

Lage:  Good  math  and  science  as  well? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  physics  professor  was  William  Martin,  who  was  the 
father  of  this  Don  Martin  that  I  mentioned.   Chemistry  was 
Green,  I  think  he  was  one  of  the  few  that  had  a  doctor's  degree, 
and  was  very  good.  Geology,  Professor  Von  Eschen  was  fine. 
Math,  interestingly  enough,  I  don't  remember  the  teachers  so 
well,  but  there  were  sound  calculus  courses.  And  then  there 
were  two  fine  engineering  faculty  members ,  Franklin  Rose  and 
Atkinson.   They  made  us  work  very  hard,  which  is  part  of  what 
you  have  to  learn  to  do  in  engineering. 


23 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery : 
Lage: 

Whinnery : 
Lage: 

Whinnery  i 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Were  they  giving  you  an  overview  of  engineering,  or  was  there 
any  specialization? 

The  things  at  that  time  every  engineer  had  to  take,  whether  they 
went  here  or  anywhere  else,  were  drafting,  surveying,  and 
introduction  to  mechanics.   But  they  also  had  some  special 
elective  courses.   Atkinson  gave  one  in  electricity,  with  a  lot 
of  demonstrations. 


What  kinds  of  things  would  he  have  presented? 
that  detail? 


Can  you  recall 


The  demonstrations  were  fairly  simple,  but  I  recall  being 
especially  impressed  by  the  behavior  of  alternating-current 
circuits  with  inductors  and  capacitors.   This  went  well  beyond 
the  treatments  we  had  had  in  physics  classes. 

Did  any  of  this  affect  your  early  teaching? 
I  don't  know.   It  might  have. 

It  seems  like  the  intriguing  classes  that  you  had  often  shape 
how  you  go  about  trying  to  intrigue  students. 

Yes.   I  hadn't  thought  about  that  course,  but  it  may  well  have 
had  an  influence. 

Was  there  any  particular  person  that  served  as  a  role  model  to 
you  or  who  helped  give  you  a  sense  of  what  you  might  want  to  go 
on  to  do? 

William  Martin  took  a  strong  personal  interest  in  me  and  helped 
very  much.   I  have  already  mentioned  Barbara  Barrett.   And  there 
was  another  very  fine  English  teacher,  much  more  formal  and 
strict,  Dr.  Cooper.   We  had  Shakespeare  and  Browning's  poetry. 
So  I  certainly  enjoyed  those. 

Did  you  always  know  you  would  go  on  to  the  university? 

No.   First  of  all,  when  I  graduated  from  high  school,  I  didn't 
think  I  had  enough  money  even  to  go  to  junior  college.   I  got  a 
$50  scholarship  which  I  think  was  just  made  up  by  the  high 
school  teachers.   So  I  went  to  junior  college,  and  again  wasn't 
sure  I  could  continue  beyond  that,  but  I  did  get  a  scholarship 
from  Berkeley.   I  don't  remember  how  much  that  was,  but  it 
probably  wasn't  very  much  by  current  standards. 


Lage:      Well,  in  the  mid-depression,  it  probably  didn't  cost  nearly  as 
much. 


24 

Whinnery:  My  room  and  board  then  was  $25  a  month. 

Lage:  When  you  came  up  here? 

Whinnery:  Yes.   Books  were  about  $5. 

Lage:  My  daughter  just  spent  $200  on  books  for  two  classes. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  believe  it.   The  registration  fee  at  Berkeley  was  $17, 
as  I  recall. 

Lage:      Did  you  work  while  you  were  in  junior  college  and  then  later  up 
here? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Most  of  my  work  was  summer  work  in  the  dry  yards,  in  the 
apricot  and  peach  industry  of  Modesto.   I  didn't  work  up  here. 

Lage:      Did  your  parents  ever  feel  that  they  needed  you  to  work  to  help 
them  out?  Was  there  a  sense  that  your  going  off  to  school  would 
make  it  hard  for  them? 

Whinnery:   No,  I  don't  think  so.   It  probably  did  make  it  harder  for  them 
but  they  certainly  wanted  me  to  go  on. 


University  of  California.  Berkeley.  1935  to  1937 


Lage:      What  was  it  like,  coming  up  to  Berkeley  from  Modesto  in  1935? 

Whinnery:   Well,  it  was  exciting,  and  a  little  bit  scary  at  first. 

Fortunately,  I  was  rooming  with  Don  Martin,  the  friend  I  have 
mentioned,  so  we  did  a  lot  of  things  together. 

Lage:      Did  he  come  up  at  the  same  time? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Also  John  Sardis,  although  I  think  he  may  have  stayed  an 
extra  term  in  Modesto.  But  in  any  event,  much  of  the  time  he 
was  here  too. 

Lage:      Where  did  you  live? 

Whinnery:   Well,  my  first  year  was  in  a  boarding  house  on  College  where  the 
dorms  are  now.   There  were  places  where  one  got  room  and  board 
for  $25  a  month.   The  second  year,  I  moved  in  with  a  family  that 
I  had  known  in  Modesto,  on  Walnut  Street. 

Lage:      Where  on  Walnut? 


25 


Whinnery:   It  was  about  two  blocks  north  as  you  walk  from  the  university. 
Lage:      So  you  lived  with  them  rather  than  with  other  students? 

Whinnery:   Mrs.  White,  who  was  divorced,  had  two  daughters  and  a  son.   The 
son,  Jim,  was  a  little  younger  than  I  but  we  were  good  friends. 
He  lives  up  in  Tahoe  now.   We  haven't  seen  each  other  for  years, 
but  we  still  exchange  Christmas  cards. 


Social  Life 


Lage  : 
Whinnery: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 


Was  there  much  social  life  for  you,  or  was  it  mainly  studying? 

I  went  to  the  Baptist  church  here  and  attended  a  youth  group 
called  the  Roger  Williams  Club. 

*i 

Jim  and  his  sisters  were  active  in  the  Roger  Williams  Club,  so  1 
went  there  quite  regularly.   But  also,  after  I  became  inducted 
into  Eta  Kappa  Nu  here,  I  met  other  students  who  became  friends. 

Is  Eta  Kappa  Nu  an  engineering  society? 

It's  the  honorary  electrical  engineering  society. 

And  it  had  a  social  component  to  it? 

Yes.   There  were  often  trips  to  some  industry  with  a  picnic 
before  or  dinner  after.   It  was  very  exciting  going  to  San 
Francisco  then,  because  we  could  only  go  by  ferry.   I  was  a 
secretary  of  our  chapter  for  a  time  and  made  many  friends  there. 
Stanley  Elliott,  who  made  a  career  at  Bell  [Telephone] 
Laboratories;  Wilton  Abbott,  who  taught  here  before  going  to 
Lockheed;  Will  Fenn,  who  was  later  active  at  the  MIT  Radiation 
Laboratory;  and  Joe  Pettit,  who  became  dean  at  Stanford  and 
later  president  of  Georgia  Tech,  were  among  these. 

So  you  still  have  ties  with  some  of  these  classmates. 


Yes. 


Any  interest  in  the  sporting  activities  on  campus? 
to  football  games? 


Did  you  go 


26 


Whinnery:   Oh,  yes,  we  went  to  all  the  football  games,  and  most  of  the 

basketball  games,  and  track  meets.   We  took  them  very  seriously. 

Lage:      Do  you  remember  political  activities  on  campus,  or  did  you  get 
involved  in  any? 

Whinnery:  No. 

Lage:  During  the  depression? 

Whinnery:  No.   Well,  yes,  I  was  on  a  strike  in  Modesto. 

Lage:  In  junior  college? 

Whinnery:   No,  in  the  fruit  industry.   I  started  at  fifteen  cents  an  hour, 
then  got  seventeen  and  a  half  cents  an  hour,  and  finally  twenty 
cents  an  hour.   Then  I  moved  to  a  different  place  where  I  got 
twenty- five  cents  an  hour,  when  most  of  the  workers  there  joined 
an  area-wide  strike.   I  didn't  really  know  what  was  going  on, 
but  joined  the  strike,  which  quickly  failed.   So  then  I  went 
back  to  my  former  job  at  twenty  cents  an  hour.   [laughter]   Not 
many  people  know  about  the  agricultural  strike  of  1935  or  so. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  a  sense  of  being  very  emotionally  committed  to  it? 

Whinnery:   No.   [laughs]   One  of  my  friends  who  didn't  join  the  strike  said 
I  just  didn't  know  what  was  happening.   That's  probably  true. 

But  coming  back  to  Berkeley,  I  suppose  there  was  political 
activity  at  Sather  Gate,  but  it  wasn't  very  obvious,  at  least  to 
those  of  us  on  the  north  side  of  campus. 


Education  in  Engineering  at  Berkeley 


Lage:      Let's  talk  about  the  engineering  program  at  that  time  and 
contrast  with  how  it's  developed  since. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  first  obvious  difference  is  that  it  was  nearly  all 

undergraduate.   There  were  a  few  master's  students  around,  but 
only  one  or  two  Ph.D.  students.   Only  one  in  electrical 
engineering,  Lyman  Fink.   So  the  emphasis  was  on  the 
undergraduate  program.   We  had  some  very  good  teachers.   The 
first  one  that  I  got  to  know  and  who  was  extremely  helpful,  and 
a  very  good  teacher,  was  Abe  Tilles.   He  later  left  the 
university  and  worked  at  PG&E  for  a  while,  then  at  Lawrence 
Livermore  Lab,  and  has  since  retired. 


27 


Lester  Reukema  was  the  powerful  lecturer.   He  had  everybody 
slightly  afraid  of  him,  but  I  greatly  admired  his  lecturing 
style. 

Lage:      What  was  his  lecturing  style? 

Whinnery:   First  of  all,  he  didn't  use  any  notes.   He  would  come  in  and 

start  filling  the  blackboard  with  equations.  A  lot  of  that  was 
showmanship,  which  I  later  learned  was  not  really  as  good 
educationally  as  the  presentations  of  others  who  were  a  little 
more  informal.   But  he  also  was  very  good  at  following  the 
literature  and  bringing  in  new  developments.   I  remember,  for 
example,  that  the  concept  of  feedback  was  just  published,  and 
within  a  day  or  so  after  the  article  came  out,  he  had  a  complete 
lecture  on  it.   He  had  essentially  photographic  memory.   He 
could  look  at  an  article  and  reproduce  it,  but  he  also  clearly 
understood  the  significance. 

Herb  [Herbert]  Scott  was  another  very  fine  person  who  had 
good  physical  pictures  and  clear  explanations.   He  was 
especially  close  to  his  students. 

Lage:      Were  these  electrical  engineers? 

Whinnery:   The  ones  I've  mentioned  so  far  are  electrical  engineers,  but  I 
had  to  take-- [laughs]  I  shouldn't  say  had  to  take,  but  I  was 
taking  mechanical  engineering  and  civil  engineering  courses  too, 
and  had  some  good  instructors  in  these. 

Lage:      When  did  you  specialize? 

Whinnery:   At  the  junior  year. 

Lage:      You  chose  a  field  of  engineering? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Now  you  have  to  choose  your  major  when  you  enter  as  a 

freshman.   Until  about  1960,  you  didn't  have  to  choose  a  branch 
of  engineering  until  your  junior  year. 

Lage:      But  even  then,  you  took  classes  in  the  other  branches? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  but  now  our  students  don't  take  very  many.   We  had  to  take 
full-year  courses  on  heat  power  engineering,  analytical 
mechanics,  and  a  civil  engineering  course  on  strength  of 
materials.   The  instructor  for  that,  [George  E.]  Troxell,  was 
very  good. 


Lage: 


Did  you  have  personal  contact  with  them? 


28 


Whinnery:   I  did  with  Abe  Tilles,  whom  I  went  to  see  several  times.   For 
example,  I  didn't  think  I  could  afford  to  join  Eta  Kappa  Nu, 
which  cost  $25,  but  he  convinced  me  that  the  association  with 
the  students  of  that  group  would  be  worth  it.   But  also  it  would 
look  good  on  my  record  when  I  went  to  get  a  job.   Getting  a  job 
at  that  time  wasn't  very  easy. 

Lage:      Twenty- five  dollars:   an  entire  month's  room  and  board.  That 
was  expensive. 

Whinnery:   That's  right. 

Also  Herb  Scott,  although  at  that  time  I  had  him  only  for  a 
laboratory.   He  hired  my  friend  Stanley  Elliott  and  me  to  work 
on  a  frequency  standard  that  had  been  given  to  him.   He  said 
later  that  it  wasn't  so  much  to  get  the  frequency  standard 
working  but  to  give  us  work.   He  was  a  marvelous  person. 

Lage:      Were  these  men  mainly  Ph.D.'s? 

Whinnery:  Reukema  was,  and  Tilles  was.  Also  Leonard  Black.  It  certainly 
wasn't  unusual  to  have  one,  but  it  wasn't  as  universal  as  it  is 
now. 

Lage:      Would  that  affect  their  style  of  teaching? 

Whinnery:   It  certainly  could,  but  there  are  other  things  that  affect  it. 

Lage:      It  wasn't  something  you  noticed. 

Whinnery:   Not  directly.   I  liked  the  style  of  Tilles  about  the  best, 
because  he  was  clear  and  very  thorough,  but  still  somewhat 
informal.   He  was  a  great  admirer  of  Reukema  and  has  said  that 
he  copied  certain  techniques  from  him. 

Lage:      Was  there  give  and  take  in  the  classroom? 

Whinnery:   These  were  big  classes,  120  or  so,  so  not  an  awful  lot. 

Lage:      Things  haven't  changed,  or  have  they?  Are  your  classes  that 
large? 

Whinnery:   There  are  still  some  that  are  that  big,  but  most  of  the  classes 
are  forty  or  fifty,  or  less.   [This  is  changing  with  the 
decreases  in  faculty.  -J.R.W.] 

Lage:      So  they  were  actually  larger  than  now.   How  large  was  the 
program? 


29 


Whinnery:   I  think  in  electrical  engineering  there  were  around  200  in  the 
class  that  I  was  in. 

Lage:      It  was  the  only  public  program  in  the  state. 
Whinnery:   Yes. 


Other  Coursework 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Did  you  have  classes  outside  of  the  College  of  Engineering? 
you  take  math  and  science? 


Did 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Yes,  I  took  math.   The  instructor  there  was  [Elmer  C.] 
Goldsworthy.   The  math  was  okay,  but  the  main  thing  I  remember 
is  that  he  took  us  to  breakfast  at  the  Faculty  Club  on  the  last 
day  of  class.   I  always  thought  that  a  marvelous  thing  to  do,  so 
I  did  that  a  few  times  with  some  of  my  classes. 

In  physics,  I  had  a  course  called  modern  physics,  which 
went  beyond  the  classical,  with  Robert  [B.]  Erode.   At  the  time, 
1  thought  him  a  very  poor  lecturer,  but  I  probably  learned  more 
from  that  class  than  any  other  class.   He  gave  very  tough 
problems,  so  to  work  them  you  had  to  go  to  the  library.   You 
couldn't  get  the  needed  information  from  any  one  book;  you  had 
to  look  through  several  books,  which  is  of  course  what  you  have 
to  do  after  school.   So  that  was  probably  the  single  most 
valuable  class  that  I  had,  but  at  the  time,  I  judged  it  by 
Erode 's  lecturing  style.   I  think  this  is  pertinent  to  class 
ratings,  where  so  much  of  it  is  the  lecturing  style.   Only  later 
do  people  fully  realize  how  much  they  really  learned  from  a 
class. 

That's  interesting.   I've  heard  from  your  colleagues  that 
engineering  was  much  more  practically  oriented  at  the  time.   Did 
that  make  physics  seem  much  more  theoretical? 

Yes,  I  think  there  was  probably  a  bigger  distinction  then  than 
there  is  now. 

Were  you  drawn  to  one  or  the  other,  the  practical  or  the 
theoretical,  at  that  time? 

I  certainly  liked  the  theoretical.   One  of  the  things  I  had  in 
mind,  though,  was  making  a  living,  and  even  though  it  was  tough 
to  get  a  job  in  anything,  there  were  more  jobs  for  an 


30 


undergraduate  B.S.  in  engineering  than  there  were  in  either 
physics  or  chemistry. 

Lage:      When  you  came  to  Berkeley,  you  knew  you  wanted  to  be  an 

engineer.   Was  this  still  coming  out  of  the  sense  that  you 
wanted  to  be  a  mechanic? 

Whinnery:   [laughs]   I  think  it  was  in  high  school  that  when  I  said  I 

wanted  to  be  a  mechanic,  it  didn't  impress  anyone.   [laughter] 
So  I  learned  that  being  an  engineer  was  a  step  up.   But  I  don't 
remember  exactly  where  it  happened. 

Lage:      Well,  of  course,  the  dam  builders  were  engineers. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   It  may  have  been  one  of  the  first  teachers  there,  that 
suggested  engineering  when  they  saw  the  direction  of  my 
interests. 


University  Medalist 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Now,  you  were  University  Medalist, 
based  on  grades? 


Tell  me  about  that.   Is  that 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Yes,  at  that  time  it  was  almost  strictly  grades.   Now  I  think 
they  have  a  pool  of  top  grade-point  persons  with  reference 
letters,  interviews,  and  so  on.   But  at  that  time,  it  was  just 
on  grades.   The  thing  that  surprised  me  was  that  I  was  here  only 
two  years,  but  was  included  along  with  the  people  who'd  had  to 
struggle  four  years. 

I  wonder  if  they  took  your  grades  from  junior  college?   They 
must  have. 

I  don't  know.   You  think  so?   I  always  assumed  not. 
Were  there  ceremonial  activities  connected  with  that? 

There  was  one  commencement  exercise  for  the  whole  university  at 
that  time,  and  there  were  2,500  graduates  that  year.   Graduation 
was  held  in  the  stadium,  and  Robert  Gordon  Sproul-- 

Who  was  a  young  president  then. 

Yes,  I  guess  he  was  pretty  young.   He  presented  the  medal,  and  I 
was  scared  to  death.   In  fact,  at  that  time,  it  made  all  of  the 
papers  the  next  day,  with  pictures  of  me  getting  the  medal,  the 


31 

Oakland  Tribune  and  the  Berkeley  Gazette  and  even  San  Francisco 
papers.   One  of  them  even  referred  to  "the  frightened 
recipient."   [laughter]   So  it  showed  that  I  was  scared  stiff. 
I  didn't  have  to  say  anything. 

Lage:      Did  it  make  the  Modesto  papers? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  hadn't  told  my  parents,  and  I  guess  they  had  mixed 

emotions:   annoyed  with  me  for  not  having  told  them,  but  proud, 
of  course. 

Lage:      They  didn't  come  up  for  your  graduation? 

Whinnery:   No.   I  guess  they  would  have  tried  if  they  had  known  although  my 
father  wasn't  well.   I  first  learned  of  it  from  the  dean  of 
engineering  a  day  or  so  before  graduation. 

Lage:      Who  was? 

Whinnery:  Dean  [Charles]  Derleth  [Jr.]  He  said,  "A  lot  of  people  say  you 
have  to  live  up  to  this,  but  I'm  telling  you  you've  got  to  live 
it  down." 

Lage:      [laughs]   I  wonder  what  he  meant  by  that? 

Whinnery:  Well,  I  think  I  know  what  he  meant.  I  suppose  he  meant,  "Don't 
let  it  go  to  your  head." 

Lage:      Right.   It's  just  the  beginning,  not  the  end. 
Whinnery:   Sure. 

Lage:      Very  interesting  reaction.   Did  you  have  a  chance  to  take  any 
classes  outside  of  engineering  and  math  and  science? 

Whinnery:   At  Berkeley?  No,  I  think  the  courses  were  engineering,  math, 
and  physics. 

Lage:      You  didn't  get  to  go  on  with  your  English? 

Whinnery:   No. 

Lage:      That's  too  bad.  You  would  have  enjoyed  that. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   It's  very  interesting,  because  now  the  accrediting 
agencies  require  that  engineers  have  a  certain  number  of 
humanistic,  social  courses.  Maybe  I  had  enough  from  junior 
college  to  fulfil  the  requirement.  Everything  I  took  here  was  a 
required  technical  course,  amounting  to  eighteen  units  a  term. 


32 


Looking  for  Work  During  the  Depression 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Where  were  most  of  your  fellow  students  planning  to  go? 
many  of  them  thinking  of  graduate  school? 


Were 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery : 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery ; 


No.   A  few  went  on  to  the  master's  program,  including  my  friend, 
Stan  Elliott.   Because  of  that,  he  was  able  to  go  to  the  Bell 
Laboratories,  which  hired  only  persons  with  a  master's  degree  or 
higher.   I  was  feeling  sad  that  I  couldn't  think  of  going  to 
Bell  Labs,  but  GE  [General  Electric  Company]  had  a  training 
program  which  turned  out  to  be  very  good  for  me. 

But  it  was  very  tough  getting  a  job  of  any  kind.   This  was 
1937  and  was  about  the  first  year  that  GE  started  recruiting 
after  the  depression. 

Were  there  many  people  here  recruiting? 

No.  GE  had  a  recruiting  team,  and  Westinghouse  also.  I  also 
interviewed  for  a  job  with  Shell  Oil  Company  in  San  Francisco 
but  didn't  get  an  offer. 

Have  we  gotten  a  good  enough  picture  here  of  the  undergraduate 
experience?   Is  there  anything  else  that  you  can  think  of  we 
should  cover?  Any  fellow  students  or  more  on  professors,  or 
contrasts  with  when  you  came  back  after  the  war? 

The  big  contrast,  so  far  as  the  university  was  concerned,  was 
with  the  postwar  period  when  graduate  studies  and  research  grew 
so  rapidly.   I'm  sure  we'll  talk  about  that  more  later. 

Did  you  keep  in  touch  with  fellow  students? 

Well,  yes,  some.   I  mentioned  two  or  three,  including  Joe 
[Joseph]  Pettit,  who  became  dean  of  engineering  at  Stanford  and 
then  president  of  Georgia  Tech. 

So  he  was  here  with  you  as  an  undergraduate? 

I'm  not  sure  he  was  in  the  same  class,  but  I  knew  him  primarily 
through  the  Eta  Kappa  Nu  organization.   Ed  Ginzton,  who  was  at 
Stanford  and  then  the  head  of  Varian  Associates,  was  in  the 
master's  program  when  I  was  an  undergraduate. 

Did  you  know  him? 

Yes.   I  didn't  know  him  as  well  as  Pettit.   I  think  that  he 
didn't  take  as  much  of  an  active  role  in  Eta  Kappa  Nu,  but 


33 

everyone  looked  up  to  him.   He  was  obviously  a  very  unusual 
person.   He  went  on  to  Stanford  for  his  doctor's  degree,  as  did 
Pettit. 

Lage:      Did  Stanford  have  a  good  reputation  in  electrical  engineering? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   Fred  Terman  was  already  building  the  reputation  of 

Stanford  in  electrical  engineering,  so  quite  a  few  of  the  people 
with  master's  degrees  from  other  institutions  went  on  for  their 
doctor's  degree  at  Stanford. 

Lage:      Did  you  keep  in  touch  with  Ed  Ginzton  over  the  years? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   A  lot  of  our  association  has  been  through  one  organization 
or  another.   I  certainly  see  him  at  conferences  quite  often. 

Lage:      And  Lyman  Fink  you  mentioned. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Lyman  Fink  became  a  vice  president  at  GE,  and  I  saw  him 
occasionally  in  Schenectady,  but  we  didn't  ever  work  closely 
together. 

Lage:      Okay.   Well,  maybe  this  is  a  good  time  to  take  a  break  and  pick 
up  with  GE  next  time . 


34 


II   GENERAL  ELECTRIC,  SCHENECTADY,  NEW  YORK,  1937  TO  1946 


[Interview  2:   January  26,  1994] 


Lage:      Today  we're  going  to  begin  with  your  experience  at  General 

Electric.   We  ended  last  time  talking  about  how  scarce  jobs  were 
in  the  depression.   Were  there  any  other  offers  except  General 
Electric  that  you  remember? 

Whinnery:   I  think  that  I  had  an  offer  from  Westinghouse,  but  I  considered 
the  GE  program  much  better  than  the  Westinghouse  program.   What 
I  really  wanted  was  Bell  Laboratories.   Even  then,  it  had  a 
reputation  in  electronics,  but  they  required  a  master's  degree 
or  higher.   I  mentioned  the  interview  with  Shell  Oil. 

Lage:      What  was  General  Electric 's  reputation? 

Whinnery:  Their  test  program  and  the  advanced  engineering  program  were 
already  well  known  around  the  country.  And  as  we'll  see,  it 
certainly  was  a  tremendously  valuable  program  for  me. 

Lage:      A  chance  for  growth. 
Whinnery:   That's  right. 

Lage:      Now,  I  read  Simon  Ramo's  oral  history,1  as  I  told  you,  and  then 
I  got  The  Business  of  Science,2  He  tells  a  wonderful  story 
about  how  playing  the  violin  helped  him  get  his  job  with  GE. 
Were  they  interested  in  your  other  interests? 


'Simon  Ramo,  Entrepreneurs  of  the  Vest,  Oral  History  Program, 
University  of  California,  Los  Angeles,  1985. 

2Simon  Ramo,  The  Business  of  Science,  Hill  and  Wang,  New  York,  1988. 


35 


Whinnery:  I  don't  remember  anything  other  than  their  concern  that  I  wasn't 
in  Tau  Beta  Pi.  They  thought  that  maybe  I  hadn't  been  asked  and 
couldn't  believe  it  when  I  said  I  couldn't  afford  the  initiation 
fee. 

Lage:  You  didn't  have  to  bring  a  portfolio  of  poetry,  or  anything  like 
that? 

Whinnery:   No.   [laughs]   I  had  written  a  few  things  by  that  time,  but  it 
wasn't  anything  that  was  widely  known—or  should  have  been. 


GE  Test  Program,  Erie,  Pennsylvania 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery! 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


You  said  this  was  a  critical  period  of  your  career,  these  years 
at  General  Electric.   I'm  drawing  on  Charles  Susskind's 
interview.1 

Yes,  that's  certainly  right. 
Why  was  that? 

Can  I  start  with  the  Test  Program  and  the  Advanced  Engineering 
Program,  and  the  assignments  I  had  on  the  program,  which  were 
the  key  things? 


Yes.   That  one  question  could  take  us  the  whole  interview, 
was  the  Test  Program? 


What 


All  the  engineering  graduates  hired  by  GE  at  that  point  were 
called  student  engineers  and  had  to  go  through  the  Test  Program. 
They  were  assigned  to  departments  on  a  rotating  basis  with  most 
of  the  work  testing  the  machinery  before  it  went  out.   Some  of 
the  tests  were  routine,  and  some  were  interesting  and  quite 
difficult. 

These  were  their  commercial  products  that  you  were  testing? 

Yes.  My  first  assignment  on  test  was  in  Erie,  Pennsylvania, 
testing  railway  contactors.  It  was  pretty  routine.  I  don't 
remember  learning  much  other  than  that  the  contactors  were 


'Interview  with  John  Whinnery,  21  June  1988,  conducted  by  Charles 
Susskind,  Department  of  Electrical  Engineeering  and  Computer  Sciences, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley. 


36 


supposed  to  open  and  close  at  certain  current  readings,  and  if 
they  didn't,  you  sent  them  back. 

I  did  enjoy  the  period  in  Erie,  because  it  was  autumn,  I 
was  on  the  night  shift  and  had  the  days  to  get  to  know  Lake 
Erie.   But  I  had  reported  late  and  the  exam  for  the  advanced 
course,  which  I  hoped  to  enter,  was  scheduled  for  about  two 
weeks  after  I  arrived  in  Erie.   So  there  wasn't  time  to  do  much 
studying. 

But  I  took  the  exam  and  must  have  passed,  because  I  was 
invited  to  Schenectady.   I  was  only  in  Erie  three  or  four  weeks. 


GE  Advanced  Engineering  Program 


Lage :      So  you  weren't  too  long  with  the  Test  Program? 

Whinnery:   No.   The  assignments  for  the  Advanced  Engineering  Program  were 
generally  a  cut  above,  although  one  was  not,  as  we'll  see  in  a 
moment.   But  in  general,  they  were  either  with  research  or 
development  groups,  or  the  testing  of  more  advanced  apparatus. 

In  addition  to  the  assignments,  there  was  class  one  morning 
a  week  with  lectures  by  experts  in  the  company.   There  were 
quizzes  and  tremendous  assignments  that  took  typically  twenty  to 
thirty  hours  a  week.   In  the  assignments  they  tried  to  have 
problems  that  came  out  of  the  company's  needs.   As  I  learned 
later  when  I  was  a  supervisor,  you  couldn't  find  enough  of 
these,  so  you  made  up  quite  a  few  yourself.   But  they  had  three 
characteristics.   First,  they  tried  to  make  you  go  back  to 
fundamentals.   For  example,  there  would  be  a  lecture  on 
Maxwell's  equations  one  week  and  then  a  problem  on  radiation 
from  antennas  designed  by  their  transmitter  department. 

The  second  characteristic  was  that  one  had  to  make 
approximations  and  idealizations,  as  in  most  real  problems.  A 
third  goal- -which  didn't  always  happen- -was  to  have  a  problem 
that  mixed  electrical,  thermal,  and  mechanical  elements 
together.  Not  all  the  problems  were  ideal,  but  they  were  more 
representative  of  real  engineering  problems  than  the  more 
artificial  ones  of  a  typical  class. 

Lage:      I  see.   So  even  at  the  time,  did  it  seem  that  way  to  you,  that 
you  were  getting  a  more  practical  course  of  training? 


37 


Whinnery:   [laughs]   I  guess  so.   We  mostly  complained  about  how  hard  the 
problems  were.   For  most  of  us,  twenty  or  thirty  hours  were 
required,  though  a  few  claimed  ten  or  less. 

Lage:      Was  this  in  addition  to  your  regular  workday? 
Whinnery:  That's  right,  except  for  the  four-hour  class. 


B.  D.  Bedford 


Whinnery:   I  still  think  the  most  valuable  part  was  in  the  assignments. 

One  I  remember  best  as  being  great  was  an  early  one  with  B.  D. 
Bedford  on  DC  power  transmission.   This  was  the  beginning  of 
transmission  by  direct  current  rather  than  alternating  current, 
an  approach  now  used  in  many  long-distance  power  transmission 
systems. 

Lage:      So  that  was  a  new  direction? 

Whinnery:   It  was  new  at  the  time.   There  was  a  thirty-kilovolt  working 

system  from  Schenectady  to  Mechanicville  thirty  miles  away.   We 
had  a  model  of  it  in  Building  37.   The  problem  was  that  it  had 
faults  and  breakdowns,  so  Bedford's  problem  was  to  try  to 
improve  the  system.   Some  of  the  problems  came  from  the 
thyratrons  and  ignitrons  that  were  used  at  that  time,  and  some 
from  the  protection  transformers  and  selsyns.   So  Bedford  would 
dream  up  changes  that  my  partner,  Ed  Kenefake,  and  I  should  try. 

Lage:      Just  the  two  of  you? 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   And  we  would  sometimes  have  to  go  to  the  other 
end  of  the  plant  to  find  the  motors  or  selsyns  to  use.   Often 
the  new  system  didn't  work  and  there  would  be  a  breakdown  with 
much  sound  and  light. 

Lage:      Was  it  intriguing? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes,  intriguing,  and  Bedford  was  such  an  inventive  person. 
I  believe  he  had  the  record  on  patents  in  the  company  at  one 
time.  He  was  a  marvelous  person  to  work  with.  And  he  gave  us 
opportunity  to  try  things  on  our  own  and  report  back  what  we 
found.   I  don't  know  that  we  made  any  great  improvements  in  the 
system. 


Lage: 


You  didn't  solve  the  problem? 


38 


Whinnery:   No,  but  we  learned  a  great  deal. 


W.  C.  Hahn 


Whinnery:   Two  important  advanced  course  assignments  were  for  W.  C.  Hahn, 
who  was  working  on  microwave  tubes  of  the  velocity  modulation 
class.   These  are  very  closely  related  to  the  devices  now  known 
as  klystrons,  but  before  the  klystrons  were  announced  by  the 
Varian  brothers  [Russell  H.  and  Sigurd  F.]. 

Lage:      But  these  were  close  in  design  to  the  klystrons? 

Whinnery:   It's  the  same  velocity  modulation  principle.   The  principle  was 
originated  by  the  Heils  in  Germany  in  1935.   Hahn  was  working 
with  Chester  Rice  trying  to  guide  planes  by  microwaves  for 
aircraft  landing  purposes  using  the  Doppler  principle.   They 
didn't  have  the  right  sources,  so  began  the  development  of  the 
velocity  modulation  tubes.   Hahn's  tube  had  tremendous  amounts 
of  power  for  that  time. 

Lage:      Was  this  a  principle  that  you  had  studied  on  the  campus  here,  or 
was  it  too  new? 

Whinnery:   No,  it  was  entirely  new.   Hahn  was  a  marvelous  experimenter,  a 
marvelous  theorist,  and  pretty  tough  on  some  people,  but  very 
nice  to  young  persons  working  with  him. 

Lage:      Was  he  a  Ph.D.? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  think  so.   He  was  an  MIT  graduate,  and  had  worked  in 
sales  for  a  while  before  Rice  recognized  his--I  would  say 
genius;  he  was  truly  a  genius. 

In  any  event,  I  learned  a  tremendous  amount  from  the  two 
six-month  assignments  with  him.   In  the  second  year  there  were 
six-month  assignments. 

Lage:      And  the  first  year  was--? 

Whinnery:   In  the  first  year,  they  were  mostly  three-month  assignments. 


39 


Simon  Ramo,  and  Collaborating  on  Fields  and  Waves  in  Modern 
Radio 


Whinnery:   Between  the  two  with  Hahn,  I  had  one  with  Ramo,  which  was  the 
most  important  one  of  all. 

Lage:      Okay,  tell  me  about  that  one. 

Whinnery:   Ramo  and  [John]  Blewett  were  then  working  on  magnetron-type 
microwave  tubes  using  rotating  space  charges.   The  magnetron 
principle  had  been  developed  by  Hull,  at  GE,  some  years  before 
but  had  not  been  useful  at  microwave  frequencies.   The 
breakthrough  work  in  microwave  magnetrons  was  done  in  England. 
Ramo  and  Blewett  had  the  right  idea,  and  it's  a  little  puzzling 
to  know  why  their  devices  didn't  work  any  better  than  they  did. 

Lage:      You  mean  the  reason  for  Ramo's  device  not  working  as  well  is 
still  not  apparent? 

Whinnery:   I  think  we  know  some  of  the  reasons,  but  not  all.   They  had 

rotating  space  charges  interacting  with  microwave  resonators. 
One  of  the  things  that  was  missing  was  a  system  for  mode 
control.   The  British  did  this  by  a  system  called  strapping. 
Even  so,  I  would  have  expected  more  interaction  than  they 
obtained. 

Ramo  was  also  working  at  that  time  on  electron  microscopes 
--perhaps  that  came  out  in  the  oral  history  you  read.   So  I  got 
to  talk  to  him  about  both  things.   That  was  when  he  asked  me  to 
join  with  him  on  the  book,  which  was  very,  very  surprising  in 
view  of  my  lack  of  expertise. 

Lage:      Early  on,  he  saw  something  in  you. 

Whinnery:   I  have  a  story  I  have  to  tell  you.   When  people  ask  why  the  book 
was  so  successful,  I  say,  "Well,  it's  very  simple.   You  take  one 
very  bright  person  who  understands  the  subject  thoroughly,  and 
one  rather  slow  person  who  doesn't  know  anything  about  it,  and 
by  the  time  the  first  one  explains  it  to  the  second  one,  if  you 
can  record  it,  you  have  very  good  pedagogy."   But  I  refuse  to 
tell  which  person  is  which. 

Lage:      [laughs]   Now,  you'll  have  to  tell  it  in  this  oral  history. 

Whinnery:   Well,  you  can  guess.   But  he  said  he  asked  me  because  he  liked 
my  poetry. 


Lage: 


How  interesting. 


Whinnery:   I  said,  "I  don't  know  enough  about  electromagnetics  to  write  a 
book."  He  said,  "Don't  worry  about  it;  I'll  tell  you." 

Lage:      How  did  you  work  together? 

Whinnery:   He  did  have  a  marvelous  concept  of  what  was  needed  at  the  time. 
He'd  followed  the  literature  closely—literature  was  then  a 
little  easier  to  follow.   It  was  mostly  in  the  Proceedings  of 
the  IRE  [Institute  of  Radio  Engineers]  and  the  Journal  of 
Applied  Physics,  with  other  journals,  of  course,  including  some 
foreign  journals.   At  the  time  he  asked  me,  he  had  an  outline  of 
the  whole  book,  which  we  changed  a  few  times,  but  nevertheless, 
even  the  first  outline  was  good. 

So  then  he  would  make  a  chapter  outline  listing  the 
articles  that  I  should  read  and  the  general  development.   He 
dictated  the  introductions  to  these  chapters  to  his  wife  while 
he  was  wiping  dishes,  and  they  were  part  of  the  reason  the  book 
was  so  successful,  his  physical  pictures  and  analogies  were  so 
clear.   I  would  then  read  the  articles  and  write  a  draft.   He 
would  then  do  a  second  draft,  and  this  went  back  and  forth 
several  times. 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Was  this  over  a  period  of  years? 
Yes.   It  started  in  1940  or  1941. 
And  it  was  published  in  '44. 

Yes.   During  1941,  and  part  of  1942,  I  was  supervisor  of  the 
high  frequency  course  of  the  Advanced  Engineering  Program.   We 
used  a  draft  in  the  course  and  got  some  feedback  from  the 
students. 

But  the  last  thing  we  did,  after  many  drafts,  was  to  read 
the  thing  aloud  to  each  other.   We  were  working  six  days  a  week, 
but  we'd  get  together  every  Sunday  in  his  place  or  our  place;  I 
was  living  with  my  mother  then.   It  was  amazing;  in  spite  of  the 
fact  that  we'd  been  back  and  forth  so  many  times,  when  we  read 
something  aloud,  there  were  always  matters  that  didn't  sound 
right  or  didn't  seem  clear.   So  we'd  mark  that  part,  and  one 
person  would  have  the  assignment  to  revise  it  for  the  next  week. 


It  sounds  like  you  worked  well  together, 
work  with? 


What  was  he  like  to 


Oh,  he  was  marvelous.   He  was  not  only  great  as  a  mentor,  but  so 
generous  to  me  in  lots  of  respects. 


Lage:      Such  as? 

Whinnery:  When  I  finished  my  two  years  of  supervision  of  the  high 

frequency  course,  he  arranged  for  me  to  join  the  Electronics 
Laboratory  as  head  of  the  theoretical  section.   I  think  his 
title  was  head  of  the  physical  electronics  section.   I  should 
have  been  working  for  him,  but  he  set  it  up  so  we  were  parallel. 
I  appreciated  it  at  the  time,  but  probably  not  until  later  did  I 
realize  how  generous  it  was . 

Lage:      Well,  he  must  have  seen  a  lot  of  promise  in  you,  or  more  than 
promise. 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know.   Maybe  it  was  the  poetry. 


Poetry  Writing 


Lage:      Now,  tell  me  more  about  the  poetry,  because  we  didn't  pick  that 
up. 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know  exactly  how  it  started.   I  had  to  write  a  few 

things  for  English  classes,  and  hated  it.   A  poem  was  required 
for  the  Eta  Kappa  Nu  initiation,  but  it  wasn't  much.   Somewhere 
at  GE  I  began  to  read  and  write  verse  more  regularly.   The  worst 
assignment  I  had  on  the  rotating  assignment  program  was  in 
testing  of  searchlights.  The  tests  were  simple—largely 
measuring  current  to  the  lights  —  and  the  two  permanent  people 
certainly  could  have  done  the  testing. 

Lage:      Doesn't  sound  like  it  took  too  much  advanced  knowledge. 

Whinnery:   No.   So  there  was  time  to  work  on  the  advanced  course  problems, 
and  from  time  to  time  I  began  to  write  some  verse.   Most  of  it 
was  light  verse,  but  in  some  I  tried  to  put  down  some  more 
thoughts . 

Lage:      And  you  did  show  them  to  people,  it  sounds  like.   I  think  that's 
always  a  big  step,  when  you  can  actually  show  others  your 
poetry. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  don't  remember  when  that  happened.   But  it  became  known, 
and  I  did  share  them  with  a  number  of  people,  including  Ramo. 

Lage:      And  maybe  it  indicated  to  him  that  you  could  put  words  on  paper. 


Whinnery:   I  suppose.   I  certainly  didn't  know  enough  about 

electromagnetics  to  co-author  a  book  at  that  time. 

Lage:      Writing  that  book  must  have  been  a  great  learning  experience  in 
itself. 

Whinnery:   It  was,  and  that's  why  I  consider  it  the  key  period  in  my 
development. 


Work  Assignments  in  the  Advanced  Engineering  Program 


Lage:      Shall  we  talk  more  about  your  assignments?   I  don't  think  we've 
covered  all  the  various  assignments,  the  ones  that  are  most 
important. 

Whinnery:   In  addition  to  the  ones  with  Ramo,  Hahn,  and  Bedford,  which 

we've  talked  about,  and  the  searchlight  testing,  there  was  an 
interesting  assignment  with  Clifford  Pick  on  radio  transmitters. 
That  was  less  research  oriented  and  more  directed  toward  an 
immediate  problem.   Fick's  group  built  radios  for  aircraft.   One 
of  the  problems  was  that  humidity  caused  the  frequency  to  shift. 
So  I  was  asked  to  find  ways  of  compensating  for  this  frequency 
shift.   I  think  they  had  already  suggested  the  use  of  resistors 
which  respond  to  humidity,  to  compensate  for  the  dielectric 
changes.   The  tests  were  encouraging  but  I  don't  know  if  the 
idea  was  used  in  a  practical  system.   The  engineers  I  worked 
with  had  the  immediate  assignments  of  designing  radios  that 
worked  in  aircraft.   They  were  all  very  helpful,  and  I  learned 
something  from  their  approaches. 

Lage:      When  you  had  to  solve  a  practical  problem  like  that,  did  you 
solve  it  by  tinkering  with  things,  or  by  talking  with  others? 

Whinnery:   All  of  the  above.   There  certainly  was  a  lot  of  discussion.   In 
the  case  of  the  transmitter,  we  actually  built  models  and  tested 
them.   The  report  on  that  was  one  of  the  earliest  of  my  GE 
reports. 

Another  interesting  assignment  was  on  a  novel  idea  for 
color  television.   Only  black  and  white  was  available  then. 
That  was  with  Siegfried  Hansen  and  Millard  Smith,  whom  I'd  see 
again  at  Hughes. 

Lage:      In  working  in  the  various  labs  on  the  assignments,  were  there 
deadlines  and  senses  of  urgency? 


43 


Whinnery:   In  the  research  labs,  like  Halm's  or  Ramo's,  no.   They  were 
trying  something  new  and  hoped  to  have  results  as  soon  as 
possible. 

Lage:      Something  new,  but  in  what  way  would  they  be  connected  with  GE's 
commercial  purpose?  Did  you  get  a  sense  of  the  larger  mission? 

Whinnery:   Both  Hahn  and  Ramo  had  clear  ideas  concerning  the  potential  of 

their  microwave  tubes,  but  there  wasn't  a  very  close  tie  between 
their  labs  and  the  departments  that  would  have  to  make  the 
commercial  developments.   I  believe  that  Hahn  was  ahead  of  the 
Varians  in  the  development  of  the  velocity-modulation  class  of 
tubes  at  one  point,  but  GE  did  not  follow  up  with  production 
versions . 

Lage:      That's  interesting  that  they  had  this  research  lab  doing  the 

important  things,  and  then  the  commercial  side  didn't  pick  up  on 
it  so  much. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Of  course,  I  shouldn't  give  the  impression  that  it's  easy 
to  know  which  research  results  deserve  commercial  development. 
I'm  telling  this  with  the  advantage  of  hindsight. 


GE  During  World  War  II 


Lage:      Where  were  you  when  the  war  descended  on  all  this  work? 

Whinnery:   I  was  still  an  advanced  course  supervisor  in  1941  when  the 

Japanese  bombed  Pearl  Harbor.   But  I  think  it  was  the  following 
summer  that  I  took  the  job  in  the  electronics  laboratory  working 
with  Ramo. 


Lage:      In  the  theoretical  section? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  but  the  "section"  consisted  of  me  and  a  young  lady,  Theo 
Eloise  Robbins.   She  did  computing  using  a  Marchand  mechanical 
calculating  machine.   But  we  did  some  fairly  useful 
calculations,  much  of  this  at  Ramo's  suggestion. 

Lage:      Were  the  wartime  assignments  then  more  directed  by  government 
needs? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  main  products  of  this  laboratory  were  some  microwave 
triodes  called  disk  seal  triodes.   They  came  to  be  known  widely 
as  lighthouse  tubes  because  of  their  characteristic  shape.   They 
were  used  in  some  radar  systems,  both  as  receivers  and 


transmitters,  mostly  at  somewhat  lower  frequencies,  but  even  up 
into  the  important  microwave  frequencies . 

Our  job  was  to  try  to  improve  the  tubes,  which  required 
studies  of  the  transit-time  effects  across  the  tubes.   Another 
goal  was  to  improve  the  circuits  that  the  tubes  worked  in.  For 
this  I  made  much  use  of  a  method  that  Hahn  had  developed  for 
analyzing  discontinuities  in  microwave  circuits.   At  that  time 
it  was  a  very  difficult  electromagnetic  problem. 

Lage:      Was  this  something  that  you  had  learned  in  working  for  Hahn,  and 
you  applied  it? 

Whinnery:   That's  right. 

Lage:      Was  there  ever  cross-fertilization?  Was  it  a  work  situation 
where  people  interacted? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes,  surely.   It  was  a  small  laboratory  with  not  more  than  a 
dozen  engineers,  but  there  was  a  great  deal  of  interaction  among 
them.   In  addition  to  the  work  on  triodes  there  was  work  on 
magnetrons  and  high-voltage  circuitry.   It  was  very  good  work 
but  did  not  have  as  much  impact  as  the  triode  work. 

Lage:  And  all  of  this  was  applicable  to  radar  equipment? 

Whinnery:  Primarily  radar  but  also  beacons  and  communication  equipment. 

Lage:  It  was  a  classified  lab? 

Whinnery:  Yes.   At  that  time,  everything  related  to  radar  was  classified. 

Lage:  How  did  that  affect  the  work  environment?  Or  did  it? 

Whinnery:  Well,  internally,  it  didn't.  It  did  mean  that  much  of  the  work 
couldn't  be  published,  or  at  least  not  until  after  the  war  when 
it  was  declassified. 

Lage:      Was  most  of  it  declassified  later  and  published? 
Whinnery:   A  lot  of  it.   Some  not. 

Lage:      Was  the  work  that  you  did  there  taken  up  and  actually  used 
later? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  the  work  on  discontinuities  and  the  transit-time  work 
especially. 


45 


Lage:      Ramo  mentions  another  lab  where  more  important  radar-related 
research  was  being  done. 

Whinnery:   The  MIT  Radiation  Laboratory  was  a  huge  laboratory,  and  the 
center  for  microwave  radar  research. 

Lage:      Were  you  in  communication  with  them? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  there  were  trips  back  and  forth.   In  fact,  I  found  on  one 
of  the  trips  that  work  on  discontinuities  in  transmission  lines 
and  wave  guides,  which  I  was  doing  by  Hahn's  method,  was  the 
subject  of  intense  work  at  the  Radiation  Lab.   Julian  Schwinger, 
who  is  now  a  Nobel  Laureate,  had  developed  many  powerful  methods 
for  attacking  these  problems.   Nathan  Marcovitz  and  David  Saxon, 
later  president  of  the  University  of  California,  were  important 
contributors. 

Lage:      David  Saxon  was  working  for  Julian  Schwinger? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know  that  he  was  working  for  him,  but  he  wrote  up  the 
notes.1  I  have  a  copy  somewhere. 


The  Influence  of  the  War  on  Electronics  Research  itif 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 


With  the  pressures  of  war  and  the  support  for  labs,  did  that 
make  a  big  difference  in  the  direction  of  and  accomplishments  in 
the  field? 

Yes.   Everybody  hoped  their  work  would  be  useful  to  the  war 
effort,  and  a  tremendous  amount  of  it  was.   Yes,  we  were  very 
conscious  of  hoping  that  our  work  would  be  useful. 

But  it  dwelt  on  things  that  had  already  been  thought  of? 

To  some  extent,  but  there  was  a  tremendous  amount  of  advance 
during  that  period.   When  you  compare  it  with  other  three-  or 
four-year  periods,  the  amount  of  advance  is  amazing. 


I  guess  that's  what  I'm  trying  to  get  at: 
contributed  to  that  advance. 


how  much  the  war 


'Julian  Schwinger  and  David  S.  Saxon,  Discontinuities  in  Waveguides: 
Notes  on  Lectures  by  Julian  Schwinger,  Gordon  and  Breach,  New  York,  1968. 


46 


Whinnery:   Yes.   To  use  the  MIT  Radiation  Lab  as  an  example,  there  had  to 
be  exploratory  work,  then  experimental  models,  and  finally 
production  systems.1  It  is  amazing  that  this  was  done  in  a  few 
years.   You've  probably  heard  the  story  of  how  the  submarine 
battle  was  won.  The  Germans  didn't  believe  that  anyone  had 
microwave  radar  and  couldn't  understand  how  their  submarines 
were  being  detected. 

Lage:      Had  the  Germans  worked  in  this  area? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  but  not  at  that  high  frequency,  and  apparently  they  didn't 
think  radar  could  be  done  at  microwave  frequencies  so  quickly. 
The  MIT  Radiation  Laboratory  deserves  tremendous  amounts  of 
credit. 

GE  was  building  radars,  but  originally  at  lower  frequency. 
But  they  were  conscious  of  the  value  in  extending  them  to 
microwave  frequencies. 

Lage:      And  of  course,  you  probably  had  a  lot  more  resources  than  you 

would  have  had  otherwise.   Did  the  government  put  a  lot  of  money 
into  the  lab? 

Whinnery:   I  suppose  so.   But  I  believe  our  lab  was  financed  by  GE, 
presumably  out  of  profits  from  military  systems  sales. 

The  heads  of  the  lab  were  [E.  D.]  McArthur  and  [William] 
White,  who  were  very  nice  people  to  work  with.   They  reported  to 
W.  R.  G.  Baker,  who  was  determined  to  build  up  electronics  in 
GE.   He  wasn't  much  impressed  by  our  laboratory,  so  he  later 
turned  it  over  to  the  research  laboratory  and  started  his  main 
laboratory  in  Syracuse.   It's  still  going  on  and  does  very  good 
work. 

Lage:      I'm  trying  to  connect  this  with  your  experience:   were  you  a 
part  of  that,  or  connected  with  the  Syracuse  work? 

Whinnery:   No,  although  we  had  some  cooperative  ventures.   I  had  no  direct 
dealings  with  Baker  except  later  in  the  Institute  of  Radio 
Engineers . 


'See,  for  example,  Five  Years  at  the  Radiation  Laboratory, 
Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology,  Cambridge,  MA,  1947. 


Fellow  Researchers  at  GE 


Lage:      Is  there  anything  else  that  we  should  talk  about  about  that 

work,  or  the  people?  You  mentioned  White  and  McArthur;  is  there 
more  to  say  about  them?  Their  background? 

Whinnery:   Both  White  and  McArthur  had  worked  on  a  variety  of  vacuum  tubes 
for  GE.   I  believe  it  was  McArthur  who  had  the  idea  of  making 
triodes  work  at  microwave  frequencies  by  using  very  small 
electrode  spacings  and  designing  the  tubes  to  fit  coaxial 
circuits.   Jim  Beggs  perfected  the  designs  and  made  the  tubes. 
Other  engineers  in  the  lab  were  Bill  Jamieson,  Anatole  (Toli) 
Gurewitsch,  Norman  Lavoo,  and  Rudy  Dehn.   They  worked  to  develop 
better  microwave  circuits  for  the  tubes  and  much  of  my  work  was 
in  analyzing  the  circuits.   So  we  all  became  close  friends. 
Ralph  Bondley  and  Bill  Teare  worked  with  magnetrons  and  I 
cooperated  some  with  them,  as  I  did  with  Harold  Lord,  who  worked 
with  pulsed  circuits  for  radar. 

Lage:      Were  these  people  older  than  yourself? 

Whinnery:   Jamieson,  Gurewitsch,  Lavoo,  and  Dehn  were  about  the  same  age, 
but  the  others  were  older. 

Lage:      How  many  of  these  people  stayed  on  with  GE  after  the  war? 

Whinnery:   Most  of  them.   Jamieson  left  because  of  a  health  problem  of  one 
of  his  daughters.   He  was  one  of  the  ones  responsible  for 
getting  Ramo  into  Hughes  Aircraft,  which  is  an  interesting  story 
in  itself. 


Leaving  GE 


Lage:      Why  did  you  leave?   I  want  you  to  comment  also  on  something  that 
Ramo  said,  that  he  felt  GE  was  not  innovative,  was  badly  out  of 
date,  and  was  bureaucratic.   Was  he  talking  about  the  later 
period,  or  do  you  think  he  was  talking  about  his  own 
experiences? 

Whinnery:   Well,  it  certainly  was  bureaucratic,  although  at  my  level  and 

with  my  assignments,  it  didn't  matter  very  much.   But  if  you  had 
a  larger  view  of  things,  as  Ramo  had,  the  bureaucracy  would  be 
very  frustrating. 


Lage:      To  get  a  new  project  set  up? 


48 


Whinnery:   Yes.   So  when  you  say  it  was  not  very  innovative,  there  were 

certainly  innovative  people  there,  but  the  management  was  pretty 
conservative.   But  Baker,  although  not  much  interested  in  our 
laboratory,  was  successful  in  building  a  very  large  electronics 
operation  in  Syracuse. 

Lage:      Is  that  one  of  the  reasons  you  might  have  left?  Or,  what  were 
the  reasons? 

Whinnery:   Once  we  were  transferred  to  the  research  lab,  it  became  obvious 
that  one  was  a  second-class  citizen  there  if  one  didn't  have  a 
Ph.D.   So  I  decided  that  I  needed  to  go  back  to  school.  Also, 
Ramo  had  left  because  of  his  wife's  health  about  a  year  earlier, 
and  I  certainly  missed  him.   But  "the  basic  reason  was  my 
decision  to  work  for  a  Ph.D. 


More  on  Simon  Ramo 


Lage:      Just  to  say  a  little  more  about  Ramo:   he  comes  across  in  his 
books  as  being  a  very  confident,  kind  of  dynamic  person. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      Could  you  tell  me  a  little  bit  about  his  personality,  his  ways 
of  working? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   He's  a  very  strong  personality,  and  in  fact,  some  people 
think  he  has  too  much  ego.   But  I've  told  you  about  his 
generosity,  not  only  in  work  assignments,  but  also  in  helping 
me,  giving  me  advice-- just  a  marvelous  person,  and  he  also  has  a 
wonderful  sense  of  humor. 

Lage:      Does  he  strike  you  right  off  as  being  an  inventive,  innovative 
sort? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   He  was  always  trying  out  new  ideas.   One  of  our  favorite 
sayings  there  was  that  you  have  to  be  careful  about  rejecting 
ideas  because  an  idea  that  at  first  seems  to  be  absolutely 
worthless,  upon  careful  study,  will  be  found  to  have  no  value 
whatsoever.   [laughter]   So  each  morning  he'd  have  two  or  three 
ideas,  all  the  way  from  using  radar  in  cars  for  collision 
avoidance  to  aids  for  the  blind. 


Lage: 


So  he  saw  the  bigger  picture. 


49 


Whinnery:   He  was  always  thinking  in  the  large.  Not  all  the  ideas  were 

great,  but  he  was  always  imagineering,  I  guess  is  the  word  for 
it. 

Lage:      When  he'd  throw  out  an  idea  like  this,  was  this  just  in 

conversation,  or  was  this  something  that  you  were  supposed  to 
follow  through  on? 

Whinnery:   Not  necessarily.   We  would  discuss  it  for  a  while,  and  if  it 
seemed  like  it  was  worth  following,  he  would  write  it  in  his 
notebook  and  have  it  witnessed.  He  might  or  might  not  follow 
through  with  a  patent  or  more  development  work  later. 

Lage:      He  really  seems  to  have  kind  of  an  inventor's  mentality. 

Whinnery:   Sure,  inventive,  but  also  a  vision  of  what's  coming  in  the 

large.   The  reason  he  has  been  so  successful  with  Hughes  and  TRW 
is  that  he  could  see  a  decade  ahead  what  was  really  going  to  be 
important.   For  instance,  with  computers.   When  they  first  came 
out,  he  realized  what  they  could  do  for  inventory  control  and 
other  applications  in  industry.   I  suppose  there  were  others  who 
saw  this,  too,  but  many  people  still  thought  of  them  as  just 
large  calculators. 

Lage:      That's  interesting. 

Whinnery:   Electronic  funds  transfer;  he  was  talking  about  this  years 
before  the  system  was  in  place. 

Lage:  It  makes  me  wonder  what  he  would  have  done  if  he  hadn't  had  to 
put  so  much  of  his  energies  towards  defense  work,  what  kind  of 
commercial,  peacetime  applications  he  might  have  pushed. 

Whinnery:   Well,  of  course,  TRW  [Thompson-Ramo-Woodridge,  Inc.]  has  quite  a 
lot  of  non-defense  business. 

Lage:      I  think  he  mentioned  in  talking  about  Hughes  that  that  was  one 
of  the  things  he  was  dissatisfied  about.   He  wanted  more 
peacetime  research. 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   At  Hughes,  he  tried  several  times  to  start  more 
commercial  projects,  but  there  were  many  pressures  to  remain  in 
the  defense  area  at  that  stage. 


50 


Other  Activities  in  Schenectady 


Lage:      What,  apart  from  work,  did  you  do  in  Schenectady? 

Whinnery:   Hiking,  canoeing  on  the  Mohawk  and  nearby  lakes,  some  attempts 
to  ski  in  winter,  occasional  trips  to  New  York.   Many  of  these 
activities  came  from  a  group  called  The  Questors,  sponsored  by 
the  YMCA  and  YWCA.   Larry  Ferguson  and  Margaret  Hauser  were  the 
counselors.   There  were  short  hikes,  record  concerts,  and  record 
dances  nearly  every  month  and  two  or  three  weekend  trips  a  year. 
I  learned  much  of  my  love  of  mountains  and  interest  in  classical 
music  from  those  activities. 

Lage:      Anything  else? 

Whinnery:   After  my  father  died,  in  1941,  my  mother  came  to  live  with  me  in 
Schenectady.   At  first  we  had  an  apartment,  but  later  bought  a 
house.   Si  Ramo  helped  persuade  me  to  do  that,  and  it  turned  out 
to  be  a  very  wise  move.   (Pat  wasn't  interested  in  meeting  me 
when  she  found  I  didn't  have  a  car,  but  relented  when  she  found 
I  had  a  house.)   After  the  house  there  was  gardening,  mowing, 
and  shoveling  snow  in  winter. 


Marriage  to  Patricia  Barry,  1944 


Lage:      You  were  married  during  this  period. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  September  17,  1944. 

Lage:      Tell  me  something  about  your  wife  and  meeting  her. 

Whinnery:   She  was  a  combination  math  and  music  major  from  the  University 
of  Colorado.   During  the  war  when  there  weren't  enough 
engineers,  they  hired  math  majors,  even  home  economics  majors 
because  of  their  familiarity  with  appliances. 

Lage:      This  was  at  GE? 

Whinnery:   At  GE.   Pat  was  working  with  jet  engine  impellers  in  the  same 
building  as  I,  but  we  didn't  meet  until  a  wedding,  when  my 
former  roommate  introduced  us .   She  was  a  bridesmaid  and  all  the 
next  week,  when  I  was  hiking  in  the  White  Mountains,  I  couldn't 
forget  how  lovely  she  was.   We  were  married  about  a  year  later.1 

Lage:      Was  she  from  Colorado,  or  had  she  just  gone  to  the  university? 


'See  "Notes  from  the  White  Mountains  to  One  at  Home,"  Appendix  B. 


51 

Whinnery:   She  was  from  Iowa.   She  went  to  Rockford,  Illinois,  for  two 
years,  and  then  graduated  from  the  University  of  Colorado  at 
Boulder. 

Lage:      So  you  had  even  that  in  common,  a  little  tie  to  Colorado. 

Whinnery:  Yes. 

Lage:      Was  she  career-minded  at  all? 

Whinnery:   No,  I  don't  think  so.   She  worked  about  six  months  after  we  were 
married,  but  before  we  left  Schenectady  had  left  her  job. 

Lage:      And  that  was  a  real  pattern  at  the  time,  that  women  left  their 
jobs  when  they  married? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   In  fact,  this  will  sound  terribly  sexist,  but  Boring,  who 
hired  the  college  graduates,  said  that  he  only  picked  very 
pretty  girls  because  he  wanted  them  all  married  and  out  of  the 
way  when  the  war  was  over.   [laughter] 

Lage:      Oh,  my  gosh.   Yes,  it  does  sound  sexist,  but  I  think  it's  a  bit 
of  social  history. 

Whinnery:   Well,  at  the  time,  that  didn't  sound  so  terrible. 

Lage:      So  you  think  there  was  even  a  conscious  sense  at  the  time  that 
"we  want  the  men  to  come  back  to  these  jobs"? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  I'm  sure  it  was  a  common  attitude.   But  there  were  some 
very  fine  women  career  persons,  engineers,  in  GE  even  then. 


52 


III   RETURN  TO  UC  BERKELEY,  1946  TO  1952,  AS  GRADUATE  STUDENT, 
LECTURER,  ASSOCIATE  PROFESSOR 


Graduate  Student 


Lage:      Let's  get  you  back  to  Berkeley,  but  also  think  of  what  other 
possibilities  there  were.   Why  did  you  come  to  Berkeley? 

Whinnery:   After  I  decided  that  I  should  return  to  school  for  a  Ph.D.,  and 
before  I  had  looked  very  broadly  at  opportunities,  Charles 
Dalziel  approached  me  about  a  teaching  position  at  Berkeley.   He 
was  a  faculty  member  in  electrical  engineering  at  Berkeley,  but 
at  that  time  on  leave  to  Division  13  of  NDRC  [National  Defense 
Research  Council] .   He  visited  Schenectady  to  see  former 
students  whenever  he  could.   On  one  of  these  visits  near  the  end 
of  the  war,  he  said,  "We  need  some  faculty  at  Berkeley,  and 
would  you  be  interested?"   I  said,  "Well,  I  want  to  get  a  Ph.D." 
He  said,  "Good.   You  can  teach  and  work  for  your  Ph.D.  at  the 
s  ame  t  ime . " 

Lage:      And  that  must  have  been  appealing. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  probably  should  have  looked  more  broadly,  but  it  was 
comfortable,  I  guess,  because  I  like  Berkeley  and  I  liked  the 
people. 

Lage:      So  you  didn't  look  into  what  were  more  prestigious  programs  at 
the  time? 

Whinnery:   No,  I  didn't.   It  was  probably  foolish  not  to  have  at  least 
looked  at  other  opportunities. 

Lage:      Well,  when  you  look  back  and  think  it  was  foolish,  would  you 

have  done  more,  or  advanced  more,  if  you'd  gone  to  Stanford  or 
MIT? 


53 


Whinnery:   It  would  have  been  different.   I'm  not  sorry  the  way  it  turned 

out,  but  considering  the  status  of  the  department  at  that  stage, 
MIT  or  Stanford  would  certainly  have  offered  more  advanced  work. 


Department  of  Electrical  Engineering,  Postwar 


Lage:      Okay,  let's  talk  about  the  status  of  the  department  at  that 
time,  when  you  came  back  right  after  the  war.   That  was  '46? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   There  were  ten  regular  faculty  members  in  electrical 

engineering  at  that  time,  counting  Dalziel,  Herb  Scott  and  Larry 
Marshall,  who  had  just  returned  from  wartime  service.   Others 
were  Thomas  McFarland,  the  chairperson,  Lester  Reukema,  Burtis 
Robertson,  Leonard  Black,  Paul  Morton,  Dan  Finch,  and  Troy 
Graybeal. 

Lage:      Were  they  working  on  more  traditional  EE? 

Whinnery:   Mostly  they  were  teaching.   There  were  only  a  few  research 

projects  at  that  time.   Teaching  loads  were  very  heavy  because 
so  many  decided  to  return  to  school,  as  I  had  done.   We  had  the 
ex-G.I.s,  both  undergraduates  and  graduates.   So  what  had  been  a 
very  small  graduate  program  suddenly  had  maybe  100  students  all 
at  once,  and  undergraduate  classes  were  overflowing. 

Lage:      What  were  they  after? 

Whinnery:   Electronics.   Typically,  they  either  had  been  in  radar  during 
the  war,  or  some  other  aspect  of  electronics.   So  classes  were 
full.   I  was  supposed  to  be  doing  advising  at  the  same  time  I 
was  trying  to  sign  up  for  classes,  and  there  were  long  lines 
everywhere.   Students  would  finally  reach  you,  and  you'd  sign 
their  program,  and  then  you'd  see  them  again  a  few  hours  later: 
all  those  classes  were  full.   But  I  admired  the  patience  that 
they  had. 

Lage:      Of  course,  many  of  them  were  returning  G.I.s,  and  they  probably 
learned  to  stand  in  line  in  the  army. 

Whinnery:   Probably  so. 


The  main  research  program  at  that  stage  was  one  In 
antennas.   [Morrough  P.]  O'Brien  in  his  oral  history1  says  that 
he  set  it  up  with  the  Naval  Electronics  Lab  in  San  Diego.   I 
hadn't  realized  that.  McFarland,  as  department  chairman,  was 
nominally  in  charge,  but  Leonard  Black  was  the  faculty  member 
who  was  most  active  in  the  project.   There  was  some  very  good 
work,  even  though  a  lot  of  the  work  was  routine- -flying  over 
antenna  systems,  measuring  patterns,  and  recommending  design 
changes . 

Lage:      So  it  was  more  like  the  GE  testing  program  than  a  research  lab. 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   But  there  were  some  very  good  people  in  the 
project,  and  some  very  good  fundamental  work. 

Lage:      Were  the  people  graduate  students? 

Whinnery:   Some  were  full-time  employees,  but  some  were  students  working 
for  doctor's  degrees.   Jack  Bolljahn  was  one  of  the  more 
original  ones,  and  he  was  working  for  a  doctor's  degree. 

Lage:      It  must  have  been  an  interesting  situation.   It  sounds  almost  as 
if  you  came  back  and  there  was  nobody  here  more  advanced  than 
you  in  your  field. 

Whinnery:   By  that  time,  our  book  was  out,  and  I  was  immediately  asked  to 
give  a  course  based  on  the  book.   Reukema  understood 
electromagnetics  thoroughly,  but  even  he  attended  my  lectures, 
[laughter]   That  was  a  little  embarrassing. 

Lage:      What  other  research  work  was  going  on? 

Whinnery:   The  next  major  project  in  the  department  was  on  high-power 

microwave  tubes  called  resnatrons.   Larry  Marshall,  during  his 
wartime  leave,  had  worked  with  [David]  Sloan,  who  was  then  at 
Westinghouse,  on  very  high-power  tubes  for  radar  jamming 
purposes .  He  obtained  a  contract  with  the  Wright  Air 
Development  Center  for  setting  up  a  large  program  in  high-power 
microwave  tubes.  Dave  Sloan  was  the  primary  technical  person  on 
that.  He  was  a  very  talented  person,  full  of  ideas,  but  he  had 
one  weakness:   he  didn't  like  to  finish  projects.   Sounds  like 
what  I  said  about  my  problem  in  high  school  with  projects  that  I 
never  finished. 


'Morrough  P.  O'Brien:   Dean  of  the  College  of  Engineering,  Pioneer  in 
Coastal  Engineering,  and  Consultant  to  General  Electric,  Regional  Oral 
History  Office,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1988. 


55 


Lage:      You  had  changed  by  this  time,  I  would  think. 

Whinnery:   Sometimes.   But  returning  to  Sloan's  lab,  there  were  some 

excellent  graduate  students  that  came  out  of  that—Bill  Beaver, 
Bill  McBride,  Peter  Kafitz,  Dan  Goodman,  and  George  Feher. 

Lage:      Did  you  work  on  that  at  all?  Was  it  related  to  your  research? 

Whinnery:   I  had  worked  on  microwave  tubes,  but  only  at  lower  powers. 

Nevertheless,  I  should  have  been  able  to  find  something  related. 
But  Leonard  Black  encouraged  me  to  join  the  antenna  project,  and 
the  discontinuity  work  that  I  had  done  at  GE  appeared  to  be 
relevant  to  that.   So  I  did  my  thesis  on  antenna  problems.   Of 
course,  I  was  teaching  part  time,  and  everyone  encouraged  me  to 
take  advantage  of  the  background  I  had. 

Lage:      Did  the  GE  educational  program  you'd  been  in  help? 

Whinnery:   It  certainly  helped.   When  we  were  in  the  GE  advanced  course,  we 
were  convinced  that  it  was  very  much  better  than  a  Ph.D. 
program.   When  I  got  here,  I  discovered  that,  well,  they're  just 
different.   Certainly  one  is  not  a  substitute  for  the  other. 

Lage:      How  was  the  Ph.D.  program  different? 

Whinnery:   As  I  said,  in  GE's  course,  we  would  have  a  four-hour  lecture  on 
Maxwell's  equations,  rather  than  a  full  course.   Then  the 
problems,  even  though  they  did  teach  you  something  about 
approximations  and  the  interdisciplinary  aspect  of  things,  they 
too  often  were  artificial  problems  too,  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  they  tried  their  best  to  get  them  out  of  the  problems  of 
the  industry.   So  there  was  somewhat  more  of  an  orderly  way,  I 
guess,  and  depth  in  the  Ph.D.  program. 


Requirements  of  the  Ph.D.  Program 


Lage:      You  finished  in  two  years,  so  you  must  have  been  able  to  cut 
corners  somewhere. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      What  did  you  have  to  accomplish  to  get  the  Ph.D.? 

Whinnery:  We  had  to  go  through  several  oral  exams,  we  had  to  take  courses, 
and  of  course  we  had  to  write  a  thesis.  At  that  time  there  were 
also  exams  in  two  languages. 


56 


Lage:      Was  that  something  you  were  prepared  for? 

Whinnery:   I  had  taken  high  school  French,  and  technical  French  is  pretty 
easy,  because  you  can  almost  read  it  if  you  know  nothing  other 
than  the  Latin  names  for  things.   German  is  much  more  difficult. 
But  at  that  time,  my  advisor  professor,  Reukema,  thought  Russian 
was  the  language  to  learn. 

Lage:      How  interesting! 

Whinnery:   So  I  started  to  learn  Russian  along  with  the  German,  and 

discovered  that  they  are  two  very,  very  difficult  languages. 
All  that  was  required  was  a  reading  knowledge  in  one ' s  technical 
field,  but  nevertheless,  they  were  difficult  languages  for  me. 
So  I  was  struggling  away  with  Russian,  but  one  day,  when  I  was 
having  my  interview  with  him,  he  asked,  "How  are  you  coming  in 
your  languages?"   I  said,  "Well,  I'm  finding  the  German  very 
difficult,  but  I  think  I  should  be  able  to  take  the  exam."  He 
then  said,  "And  how  is  your  French?"  I  said,  "I  think  it's 
coming  along  fine."   [laughter] 

Lage:      He  forgot  the  Russian? 

Whinnery:   He  had  forgotten  the  Russian.   So  I  took  my  exam  in  French. 

Lage:      It's  interesting  that  he  perceived  that  Russian  was  important. 
Do  you  have  any  idea  of  his  thinking  there? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  sure,  and  he  was  right. 
II 

Whinnery:   There  was  so  much  excellent  work  in  Russian.   Most  of  the  major 
Russian  journals  eventually  were  translated  to  English.   So  in 
that  sense,  it  wasn't  as  important  as  it  might  have  seemed.   But 
nevertheless,  Russians  were  doing  excellent  work  in  our  field 
and  there  was  a  delay  in  the  translations. 

Lage:      Was  there  free  exchange  of  information? 

Whinnery:   For  basic  work,  yes.   Not  so  much  for  applications  and  these 
became  more  restricted  as  the  cold  war  worsened. 

Lage:      You  implied  that  you  don't  have  to  have  two  foreign  languages 
any  more.   Is  that  correct? 

Whinnery:   The  language  requirement  is  different  for  different  departments. 
There  is  no  language  requirement  in  EE  at  present. 


57 


Lage:      Do  you  think  that's  a  good  direction  to  go,  or  not? 

Whinnery:   One  reason  that  I  wouldn't  reinstate  the  language  requirement  is 
that  English  is  the  international  technical  language  now.   On 
the  other  hand,  I  think  I  would  certainly  encourage  students  to 
learn  some  languages  early,  because  travel  is  now  much  more 
universal  than  it  was.  My  high  school  French  and  my  Ph.D. 
German  help  a  little  when  I  travel  in  France  or  Germany,  but  I 
wish  I  were  much  more  proficient. 

Lage:      Does  this  mean  that  technical  papers  that  come  out  of  Germany 
and  France  are  actually  written  in  English? 

Whinnery:   Most  of  them. 

Lage:      Not  just  translated? 

Whinnery:   There  are  certainly  technical  journals  in  the  language  of  the 

country.   But  if  the  authors  want  to  have  international  notice, 
they  will  publish  in  one  of  our  journals.   In  some  of  the  French 
and  German  journals,  there  is  a  choice:   papers  can  be  in 
English  or  the  native  language.   English  is  the  official 
language  of  most  international  conferences  in  our  field. 

Lage:      The  burden  is  on  them  to  have  a  really  high-level  knowledge  of 
English? 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   And  it  is  also  true  in  Japan.   There  are  journals 
that  just  publish  in  Japan,  but  if  they  want  to  be 
internationally  known,  they  publish  in  English.   For  the 
journals  in  my  office,  I'm  sure  you'd  find  a  third  of  the 
authors  Japanese. 

So  they're  doing  a  lot  of  important  work,  of 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Oh,  really? 
course. 

Oh,  yes. 

Growth  of  the  Department 


Lage:      You  mentioned  the  huge  increase  in  student  population  after  the 
war.   Were  you  in  on  any  of  the  discussions  on  how  the 
department  would  respond  to  it? 

Whinnery:   Not  really  at  a  policy  level  at  that  stage.   I  took  part  in 
discussions  on  how  to  teach  the  large  classes. 


58 

Lage:      How  large  were  the  classes  you  were  teaching? 

Whinnery:   One  hundred  twenty  to  150  students,  something  in  that  range. 

Lage:      Would  you  have  a  teaching  assistant? 

Whinnery:  Only  for  laboratories,  but  not  for  lecture  classes.  We  graded 
our  own  papers.  For  final  exams,  we  had  to  have  the  grades  in 
the  next  day.  [laughter] 

Lage:      Oh,  my  lord! 

Whinnery:   So  we'd  stay  up  all  night  grading  these  120  exams,  and  making 

out  the  grades.   They  were  tough  on  you  if  you  didn't  drop  them 
in  that  mailbox  by  the  time  they  were  due. 

Lage:      That's  a  contrast  with  today. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   And  class  loads  were  high  also.   After  I  became  full  time, 
I  recall  having  two  undergraduate  lectures,  a  graduate  course, 
and  an  undergraduate  lab  in  one  semester. 

Lage:      I  think  you'd  have  quite  a  lot  of  complaint  if  professors  had  to 
go  back  to  that. 

Whinnery:  That's  right. 

Lage:  Did  this  leave  you  much  time  for  research? 

Whinnery:  No. 

Lage:  How  did  you  manage? 

Whinnery:   Well,  that  was  one  of  the  reasons  I  took  the  leave  at  Hughes, 
which  we'll  discuss  later. 

Lage:      And  then  you  were  an  assistant  professor,  once  you  got  your 
Ph.D.? 

Whinnery:   No,  I  received  an  associate  professorship,  but  at  a  lower  salary 

than  listed  for  that  range,  as  I  found  out  later.   I  went  to  see 

Dean  O'Brien  to  see  if  this  represented  their  opinion  of  my 

abilities.  He  said  no,  and  an  adjustment  was  made. 

Lage:      This  was  before  you  left  for  Hughes? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   In  those  two  or  three  years,  I  had  a  couple  of  very  good 
graduate  students.   One  of  them,  Weigan  Lin,  returned  to  China, 
and  is  now  a  member  of  the  Chinese  Academy  of  Science.   Another 


Lage: 


59 


was  Sriramamurti  Yadavalli.   The  ideas  I  suggested  to  them 
really  grew  out  of  my  GE  work.   There  wasn't  much  time  for  new 
ideas. 

And  was  this  discussed  in  the  department,  or  was  it  not 
troubling  for  the  older  generation? 


Whinnery:   I'm  afraid  it  was  considered  fairly  normal  to  those  who  had  been 
in  the  department  for  some  time. 


Samuel  Silver 


Whinnery:   The  biggest  change  came  when  Samuel  Silver  joined  the 

department.   He  was  one  of  the  most  important  persons  in 
changing  the  culture  of  the  department. 

Lage:  Do  you  remember  when  he  came? 

Whinnery:  A  year  or  so  after  I  arrived. 

Lage:  And  did  he  come  as  a  professor,  not  as  a  student? 

Whinnery:  He  was  either  associate  professor  or  professor. 

Lage:  Was  he  your  age  group  or  older? 

Whinnery:   I  think  he  might  have  been  a  year  or  so  older.   But  he  did  have 
his  Ph.D.  from  MIT,  and  he  was  very  familiar  with  a  research- 
oriented  program. 

Lage:      So  he  knew  what  the  top-level  research  universities  were  doing. 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   One  example  is  his  change  of  the  antenna  project. 
It  was  built  up  as  a  wartime  program  and  was  about  to  be  ended, 
but  Sam,  realizing  what  good  work  was  going  on,  convinced  the 
Office  of  Naval  Research  to  support  a  smaller  but  research- 
oriented  program  in  antennas.   That  went  on  for  years.   But 
also,  in  such  things  as  teaching  loads,  curricula,  and  policies 
with  respect  to  graduate-level  examinations,  he  was  tremendously 
influential. 

Lage:      He  must  have  been  quite  a  leader,  to  sort  of  turn  things  around. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  he  was.   He  had  very  high  standards  and  convinced  others 
largely  by  moral  persuasion. 


60 


Lage:      I  am  curious  why  he  came  to  Berkeley.   Do  you  know  that? 

Whinnery:   He  was  one  of  the  most  active  persons  in  radar  antenna  research 
at  the  MIT  Radiation  Lab.   After  that,  he  went  to  the  Naval 
Research  Lab  and  continued  antenna  work.   He  and  Reukema  were  on 
an  advisory  committee  together,  and  Reukema  convinced  him  to 
come  here.   I  don't  know  all  of  the  reasons,  but  the  Bay  Area  is 
attractive  to  many  people  and,  although  the  department  did  not 
have  a  major  reputation,  the  university  as  a  whole  did. 

Lage:      He  didn't  have  a  tie  to  the  area? 
Whinnery:   No. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  a  sense  that  this  older  generation,  like  Reukema, 
wanted  to  make  Berkeley  more  research-oriented?   I  saw  in 
O'Brien's  oral  history  where  he  calls  the  pre-war  electronic 
engineering  professors  the  "fuddy-duddies."   [laughter] 

Whinnery:   I  don't  think  that's  quite  fair.   I  think  they  certainly  were 

interested  in  making  the  department  stronger,  and  they  did  give 
us  support.   Nevertheless,  teaching  had  priority,  and  teaching 
loads  were  high.   I  remember  bur  department  chairman,  McFarland, 
saying  something  like,  "Well,  you  should  be  willing  to  teach 
graduate  courses  without  credit,  because  that's  where  you  have 
fun."  That's  true  to  a  certain  extent,  but  they  also  take  a  lot 
of  work. 

Lage:      I  want  to  talk  more  about  this  whole  change,  and  I  don't  know  if 
this  is  the  time  to  talk  about  it  or  after  we  get  you  through 
Hughes.   Where  is  it  more  appropriate? 

Whinnery:   I  think  after  we  get  through  Hughes,  since  most  of  the  changes 
occurred  after  that. 


61 


IV  HUGHES  AIRCRAFT,  1951  TO  1952 


Lage:      How  did  you  happen  to  go  to  Hughes? 

Whinnery:   Maybe  it's  important  to  first  tell  how  Hughes  developed  into 
such  an  important  electronic  center.   I  mentioned  that  Bill 
Jamieson  left  our  GE  group  because  of  his  daughter's  health.   At 
that  time  there  was  very  little  electronics  industry  in 
California.   He  did  find  that  Hughes  had  a  small  contract  in 
Identification  Friend  or  Foe,  which  is  a  radar  system  that  tells 
whether  the  plane  you  are  tracking  is  on  your  side  or  on  the 
other  side. 

So  he  got  a  job  there.   At  that  time,  Ramo  was  acting  as 
liaison  with  GE  at  the  Jet  Propulsion  Lab  in  Pasadena.   He  had 
moved  to  California  because  of  his  wife's  health,  but  he 
realized  that  was  not  a  career  job.   He  almost  went  to  UCLA,  but 
that  didn't  work  out.   Perhaps  his  history  explains  the  reason. 
He  certainly  would  have  been  a  marvelous  teacher. 

Lage:      I  don't  remember  him  talking  about  that,  but  maybe  he  did. 

Whinnery:   But  in  any  event,  Bill  Jamieson  convinced  him  to  look  at  Hughes, 
saying  something  like,  "There's  a  pot  of  money  here  if  somebody 
knows  how  to  use  it."   So  he  joined  Hughes.   I  don't  know  the 
details  of  the  negotiations,  but  later  [Dean]  Wooldridge,  who 
was  at  Bell  Laboratories,  joined  him.   They  had  been  classmates 
at  Caltech  [California  Institute  of  Technology]  and  were  good 
friends.   There  were  many  good  people  anxious  to  come  to 
California  after  the  war,  so  once  this  became  known,  they  had 
their  pick  of  some  marvelous  people.  And  an  enormous  change 
occurred  in  just  a  couple  of  years. 

In  1948,  after  I  finished  my  Ph.D.,  I  spent  one  summer  at 
Hughes,  working  on  antennas  again,  and  found  it  very 
stimulating.   It  was  already  a  very  dynamic  place.   When  I  left, 
Ramo  gave  me  an  open  invitation  to  come  either  as  a  permanent 


62 


Lage: 


employee  or  on  leave  as  soon  as  I  could,  with  a  choice  of  areas 
to  work  in. 

That's  a  nice  kind  of  invitation. 


Microwave  Tube  Research  Section 


Whinnery:   So  as  I  began  to  realize  that  I  needed  change,  I  decided  to 

accept  the  invitation.   At  that  time,  Ramo  and  Wooldridge  were 
starting  a  new  electronics  laboratory  with  research  on  microwave 
tubes  and  storage  tubes. 

Lage:      At  Hughes? 

Whinnery:   At  Hughes.   It  had  a  very  fine  person,  Andrew  Haeff,  in  charge. 
Haef f  had  already  hired  some  of  the  young  people  that  turned  out 
to  be  stars,  and  then  he  and  I  together  did  some  more 
recruiting. 

The  group  was  an  amazing  group,  because  it  included  [Dean] 
Watkins  and  [H.  Richard)  Johnson.   They  later  formed  the 
Watkins- Johnson  corporation.   Watkins,  you  know,  is  a  regent  of 
the  university.   There  was  Ned  Birdsall,  who  is  now  next  door; 
Tony  Siegman,  who  is  a  very  distinguished  faculty  member  at 
Stanford;  Orrin  Hoch,  who  became  CEO  at  Litton;  and  George 
Brewer,  who  stayed  in  the  Hughes  Research  Labs  and  did  some 
excellent  work  on  ion  propulsion.   There  were  others;  it  was  an 
amazing  and  exciting  group  to  work  with.   We  had  a  lot  of  fun 
for  a  year  and  a  half. 

Lage:      You  were  there  a  year  and  a  half? 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      How  did  you  work?  Was  this  a  collaborative  kind  of  research? 

Whinnery:   I  was  appointed  head  of  the  microwave  tube  section  of  the  lab, 

but  it  was  my  first  administrative  assignment,  and  I  didn't  know 
how  to  administer.   [laughter]   I  thought  of  the  others  as 
colleagues,  and  we  just  worked  together. 

The  other  section  of  the  lab  was  concerned  with  storage 
tubes.   It  also  had  some  excellent  people  —  Siegfried  Hansen  and 
Millard  Smith,  with  whom  I  had  worked  on  television  at  GE,  and 
George  Smith,  who  later  became  director  of  the  Hughes  Research 


63 


Laboratory.   There  was  intersection  with  these  three,  though  not 
as  much  as  with  members  of  my  section. 


Working  Conditions  at  Hughes 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Could  you  just  describe  what  it  was  like? 
voice  it  was  very  exciting. 


I  can  tell  from  your 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


The  goal  in  setting  this  up  was  to  develop  new  tubes  for  novel 
radar  or  communication  systems.  And  in  the  end  that  happened. 
The  Hughes  tube  division  was  key  to  some  of  the  success  in 
satellites.   But  we  were  given  complete  freedom  to  choose  the 
ideas.   Some  of  the  work—increasing  power,  increasing 
tunabilities,  and  decreasing  noise—was  obviously  important. 
Other  ideas  which  seemed  promising  at  the  time  turned  out  not  to 
be  very  important.   But  they  were  all  very  exciting 
intellectually. 

As  administrator,  would  it  be  your  job  to  talk  to  people  about 
what  they  were  doing,  and  guide  them? 

We  discussed  the  ideas  as  a  group,  and  with  Haeff,  but  I  didn't 
give  orders. 

Was  everybody  on  their  own  problem? 

They  tended  to  work  in  couples.   Birdsall  and  Brewer  worked  very 
closely  together.   Siegman  was  just  a  young  person  taking  a 
master's  degree  at  UCLA.   He  worked  then  for  Dean  Watkins,  but 
was  already  a  contributor. 

Did  you  work  with  somebody? 

I  interacted  with  each  of  the  groups,  the  degree  depending  upon 
where  I  could  make  a  contribution.  The  main  areas  I  recall  were 
with  Watkins  on  noise,  Birdsall  on  reactive-wall  amplifiers,  and 
Johnson  on  tunable  oscillators. 

How  about  something  as  mundane  as  the  working  conditions, 
compared  to  what  you  had  left  here? 

The  antenna  lab  at  UC  had  a  reasonable  setup  for  the 
measurements  of  concern  there,  and  Sloan's  lab  had  a  good  budget 
and  was  getting  good  equipment.   But  at  Hughes  it  seemed  a 
different  order  of  magnitude.   I  wouldn't  say  we  could  get  any 
instrument  we  wanted,  but  there  was  a  generous  budget  for 


64 


equipment.   Of  course,  the  lab  was  just  being  set  up,  so  there 
were  probably  special  allocations  for  that  purpose. 

Lage:      Was  there  much  bureaucracy  there? 

Whinnery:   There  were  frequent  changes  in  operating  procedures  because  of 
the  rapid  growth  of  the  organization,  but  nothing  serious  at  my 
level.   Haeff,  as  head  of  the  laboratory,  handled  most  of  these 
problems.   He  was  a  very  exciting  person  with  a  lot  of  ideas  and 
did  have  strong  feelings  about  the  direction  of  our  research, 
but  I  can't  remember  any  time  when  he  turned  down  anyone  wanting 
to  work  on  a  problem. 


Simon  Ramo  and  Dean  Wooldridge 


Whinnery:   Ramo  and  Wooldridge  were  co-directors  of  the  whole  Research  and 
Development  Laboratories,  which  by  that  time  were  becoming  quite 
large.   They  worked  together  beautifully.   They're  entirely 
different  personalities,  but  if  you  went  to  one,  the  first  thing 
they'd  ask  was,  "Have  you  talked  to  Si  (or  Dean)  about  this?" 
If  you  had,  of  course,  they  wouldn't  reverse  the  other  without 
at  least  discussing  with  them.   But  if  you  hadn't,  they  would 
almost  always  come  out  with  identical  decisions,  in  spite  of 
their  different  personalities. 

Lage:      Was  Dean  a  less  assertive  personality? 

Whinnery:   When  rime  published  a  cover  story  about  them,  they  were  referred 
to  as  the  salesman  and  the  professor.   But  intellectually,  they 
were  both  tremendous  in  terms  of  analyzing  a  problem. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  much  relationship  with  both  of  them  then? 

Whinnery:   Not  a  lot.   I  was  a  member  of  an  advisory  council  which  met  with 
them  about  every  two  weeks.   The  purpose  was  to  discuss  policy 
issues,  but  I  don't  remember  making  many  policy  suggestions. 

And  I  did  have  meetings  with  Ramo  concerning  the  first 
revision  of  our  book.   He  didn't  have  a  lot  of  time  for  it,  but 
he  did  look  over  all  the  changes  and  made  some  very  useful 
suggestions. 

Lage:      The  first  revision  was  done  during  that  year  at  Hughes? 
Whinnery:   That's  right. 


65 


Research  and  the  Cold  War 


Lage:      We  talked  about  during  the  war  having  a  sense  of  contributing  to 
the  war  effort.   Was  there  a  sense  of  that  at  Hughes,  any 
urgency  in  developing  new  technology  for  the  cold  war? 

Whinnery:  Yes.   Certainly  the  importance  of  defense  and  defense  technology 
was  felt.   Si  was  already  concerned  with  commercial 
applications,  but  at  the  working  level,  the  emphasis  was  on 
radar  systems  or  missile  guidance  systems. 

Lage:      And  did  they  do  it  with  the  sense  that,  "We  have  to  develop 
these  things  before  the  Russians  do,"  or  was  that  not  so 
prominent  at  that  time? 

Whinnery:   I  think  the  Russian  aspect  became  stronger  later.   I  suppose  it 
must  have  been  there  already.   Otherwise,  why  were  we  doing  it? 

Lage:      It  was  fun.   You  bring  that  out. 

Whinnery:   It  was  fun.   And  that,  unfortunately,  may  have  been  three- 
quarters  of  it. 


Comparing  Industry  and  Academia,  and  Return  to  Berkeley 


Lage:      I  noticed  in  one  of  your  sets  of  papers  in  the  Bancroft 

[Library],1  I  think  you  had  written  to  someone  to  try  to  get 
them  to  come  to  Berkeley  from  an  industry  lab,  and  they  didn't 
want  to  leave.   They  were  curious  why  you  had  come  back  and 
wanted  to  talk  to  you  about  evaluating  life  in  an  industrial 
organization  as  compared  to  the  university.   Is  that  something 
you  could  do  now?  I  don't  know  if  you  ever  had  that 
conversation  with  this  person. 

Whinnery:   I  don't  remember  that  letter,  but  many  people  are  puzzled  about 
my  return  when  I  talk  about  the  fun  we  had  at  Hughes  and  the 
difficulties  I  had  had  here.   I  often  wondered  myself,  although 
I  am  not  sorry  that  it  happened  that  way.  The  strongest  reason 
was  from  the  efforts  that  Sam  Silver  made  to  convince  me  to  come 
back.   He  consulted  at  Hughes,  so  I  saw  him  regularly,  and  he 


'John  R.  Whinnery  papers  [ca.  1946-1977],  The  Bancroft  Library, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley. 


66 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery : 


kept  me  informed.   He  was  then  working  to  have  the  Electronics 
Research  Lab  set  up. 

So  he  was  setting  something  up  at  Berkeley  that  might  compete  as 
a  place  to  do  quality  research? 

Yes,  although  the  immediate  motivation  was  to  consolidate  what 
we  had.   He  could  have  been  the  first  director,  but  he  didn't 
want  to  be  at  that  time,  although  he  was  later.   He  wanted  me  to 
come  back  and  be  the  director.   It  took  quite  a  bit  of  doing. 

To  persuade  you? 

Yes.  His  argument  was  that  Hughes  was  going  to  go  on,  but  that 
I  could  make  a  much  bigger  difference  at  Berkeley.  We  had  many 
discussions  about  the  problems  here,  and  the  promise. 

I  did  notice  several  letters  back  and  forth  with  O'Brien 
negotiating  on  your  position  when  you  came  back.  Do  you 
remember  that? 

Not  in  much  detail.   I  remember  a  discussion  with  Associate  Dean 
Everett  [D.]  Howe,  who  had  the  impression  that  I  was  just 
jockeying  for  salary,  which  is  not  what  I  thought  I  was  doing. 

Were  you  jockeying  in  part  to  have  a  more  limited  teaching  load? 

I  don't  remember  the  details.   I  do  know  that  it  was  not  an  easy 
decision,  and  that  I  was  trying  to  find  conditions  that  would 
make  it  possible  to  accomplish  something  useful. 


Was  this  a  decision  that  your  wife  had  a  role  in? 
one  way  or  another? 


Did  she  care 


We  certainly  talked  about  it.   In  all  of  the  moves,  she  has  been 
very  supportive,  maybe  with  varying  degrees  of  enthusiasm,  but 
we  certainly  discussed  each  move. 

In  a  job  like  the  one  at  Hughes,  how  long  is  the  work  day?  Was 
this  something  that  extends  into  the  evenings  and  weekends? 

There  are  certainly  jobs  at  Hughes  that  do.   To  get  a  satellite 
out  on  a  schedule,  work  is  around  the  clock.   In  a  research 
environment  there  are  occasions  when  you  are  trying  to  finish  a 
paper,  or  have  results  so  exciting  that  you  want  to  continue  all 
weekend,  but  there  are  not  the  same  deadlines.   And  it  was  not 
the  same  as  in  the  university,  where  there  are  lectures  to 
prepare,  theses  to  read,  and  committee  meetings,  so  that  you 
work  as  much  as  you  can  stand. 


67 


Lage:      So  the  hours  were  not  as  demanding  in  industry? 

Whinnery:   I  think  that's  one  of  the  things  that  Pat  mentioned.   "You 

aren't  working  nearly  as  hard  here  as  you  were."  But  then,  we 
discussed  some  of  the  nice  things  about  the  university: 
summers,  when  the  pressure  is  off  a  bit,  and  the  sabbatical 
leave  system. 


Howard  Hughes 


Lage:      Do  you  have  any  Howard  Hughes  stories  from  your  experiences 
there? 

Whinnery:   I  saw  him  once.   He  came  in  with  a  group  of  generals  who  were 
visiting  our  lab.   He  was  in  old  cords  and  stayed  in  the 
background.   One  might  have  thought  him  a  mechanic  or  driver. 

** 

Whinnery:   My  friend,  Bill  Jamieson,  was  a  person  that  Hughes  decided  to 
call  to  fix  his  electronic  equipment,  which  he  had  to  augment 
his  poor  hearing.   According  to  Bill,  he  would  call  at  three 
a.m.  with  a  request  something  like,  "Bill?  This  is  Howard. 
Were  you  doing  anything?"   [laughter]   "No,  Howard,  not  a 
thing."   "Well,  could  you  come  over  and  look  at  my  radio,"  or 
whatever  it  would  be.   And  when  he  got  there,  there  would  be  one 
of  these  lovely  starlets  that  Hughes  was  famous  for. 

Lage:      I'm  surprised  he  didn't  get  his  outfit  working  on  hearing  aids. 

Whinnery:   He  didn't  pay  much  attention  to  the  electronics  part  of  the 

company  until  later.   When  he  did,  it  became  impossible  for  Ramo 
and  Wooldridge,  so  they  started  their  own  company. 

Lage:  Just  as  well  to  have  him  on  the  outskirts. 

Whinnery:  That's  right. 

Lage:  Ramo  had  some  good  descriptions  of  Hughes. 

Whinnery:  Oh,  yes,  in  the  book,  The  Business  of  Science. 


68 


Hughes  Aircraft  and  the  Value  of  Industrial  Experience 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 
Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Is  there  anything  else  that  we  should  say  about  your  experience 
at  Hughes,  and  how  it  may  have  shaped  your  future? 

All  of  the  industrial  experiences  were  critical  in  my  career. 
Just  as  the  GE  experience  carried  me  through  a  few  years  here, 
the  Hughes  experience  really  affected  the  whole  program  I  had 
for  the  next  decade  in  microwave  tubes . 

When  you  say  it  affected  it,  you  mean  what  you  learned  there? 

What  I  learned  technically,  acquaintance  with  good  people,  and 
sources  of  support.   The  later  year  at  Bell  Laboratories  was 
influential  in  getting  me  into  optics.   So  the  industrial 
experiences  have  been  tremendously  key  elements  of  my 
development.   Hughes  certainly  was  one  of  those. 


Now,  is  that  true  of  your  colleagues? 
into  industry  periodically? 


Have  they  also  dipped 


I  think  to  varying  degrees.   Quite  a  few  of  them  have  taken 
industrial  leaves.   Others  find  a  sabbatical  at  a  university  a 
perfectly  good  way  of  rejuvenating  themselves.   Of  course,  quite 
a  few  come  to  the  university  with  an  industrial  background. 

Well,  that's  a  good  place  to  stop,  and  take  up  next  time  with 
what  you  found  when  you  came  back  to  Berkeley. 

All  right.   Before  we  do,  I  might  tell  one  additional  story. 
Birdsall  likes  to  tell  of  how  we  would  often  eat  lunch  together 
at  Hughes  on  the  roof  of  our  laboratory.   I  would  tell  these 
stories  of  bureaucracy  and  frustration  at  Berkeley. 

So  when  I  told  him  that  I  was  going  back,  he  thought  I  was 
crazy,  or  that  I'd  been  misleading  him  all  along.   [laughs]   I 
probably  did  exaggerate  to  make  a  good  story. 

And  then  were  you  the  one  who  recruited  him  here? 

Later,  yes. 

You  had  do  to  some  fancy  talking  at  that  point? 

He  came  on  a  leave  during  my  first  sabbatical  in  Switzerland. 
He  was  on  leave  from  GE  and  could  have  gone  back.   So  it  is  his 
own  fault  if  he  didn't  learn  what  he  was  getting  into, 
[laughter] 


69 


VICE  CHAIR,  DIVISION  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING,  AND  HEAD  OF 
ELECTRONICS  RESEARCH  LABORATORY,  UC  BERKELEY,  1952  TO  1956 


Collegiality  and  Personnel  in  Electrical  Engineering 
[Interview  3:   February  9,  1994]  ft 


Lage:      We're  going  to  talk  today  about  division,  department,  college, 

and  lab  matters,  and  you  wanted  to  pick  up  with  some  issues  from 
before  your  time  at  Hughes. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Last  time,  when  we  talked  about  the  period  just  after  the 
war,  I  emphasized  some  of  the  problems  of  the  department.   But  I 
did  want  to  describe  an  important  characteristic,  which  I'm 
happy  to  say  is  still  retained.   Members  of  the  department  were 
very  friendly,  and  even  though  they  argued  tremendously  over 
issues  of  curriculum  and  space,  no  one  seemed  to  take  the  issues 
personally.   They  could  argue  heatedly  in  a  department  meeting, 
and  then  go  out  to  coffee  together. 

Lage:      When  you  say  department,  are  we  talking  about  what  was  then  the 
Division  of  Electrical  Engineering? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  it  was  then  a  division  of  the  Department  of  Engineering. 
Lage:      Do  you  have  a  sense  of  why  that  sense  of  collegiality  occurred? 

Whinnery:   Certainly  Tom  McFarland,  the  chairman,  was  a  very  friendly 

person.   He  and  his  wife  had  the  whole  faculty  in  their  home 
several  times  a  year,  and  other  members  of  the  faculty  likewise 
entertained  each  other.  There  was  a  spirit  of  working  together, 
even  when  members  disagreed  on  particular  issues. 

Lage:      Somebody  pointed  out  to  me  that  there's  a  greater  sense  of 

collegiality  in  electrical  engineering  than  in  some  of  the  other 
departments. 


70 


Whinnery:   I  think  so.   I  think  it  had  something  to  do  with  the  group  that 
started  it  that  way;  this  is  why  I  wanted  to  mention  that. 

Also,  as  we  mentioned  last  time,  the  tremendous  teaching 
loads  with  the  returning  G.I.s  required  some  buildup  of  the 
division.  Much  of  the  hiring  had  to  be  temporary  persons  with 
lectureships,  or  other  temporary  positions.  But  some  were 
regular  appointees.  We've  talked  about  Sam  Silver,  who  was 
terribly  important.  But  Bob  [Robert  M.]  Saunders,  who  later 
became  the  department  chair,  and  following  that,  dean  of 
engineering  at  Irvine,  came  at  that  time.  And  Otto  Smith.   I'll 
perhaps  think  of  some  others. 

Lage:      And  they  were  hired  in  this  immediate  postwar  period? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   In  fact,  some  of  them  within  six  months  or  so  of  the  time 
that  I  came. 


Early  Computer  Research 


Whinnery:   Another  important  development  was  Paul  Morton's  decision  to 
start  the  work  on  computers.   He  and  [Derrick  H.]  Lehmer  in 
mathematics --Lehmer  at  the  beginning  was  quite  closely 
associated,  but  later  the  emphasis  was  on  Paul  Morton's  work. 
This  was,  of  course,  a  very  early  project  in  computers.   At  that 
time,  most  of  the  significant  work  on  digital  computers  was 
being  done  in  universities:   the  Project  Whirlwind  at  MIT,  ILIAC 
at  Illinois,  MIDAC  at  Michigan,  and  SWAC  at  UCLA. 

Lage:  And  they  were  at  universities,  whereas  so  much  of  the  other  work 
was  based  in  industries? 

Whinnery:  Yes.  A  lot  of  people  have  forgotten  this,  that  for  about  a  ten- 
year  period,  the  major  digital  computer  research  and  the  working 
digital  computers  were  all  in  universities,  and  all  supported  by 
the  government. 

Lage:      Do  you  have  a  sense  of  why  that  occurred? 

Whinnery:   It  started  with  the  ENIAC  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  that 
was  done  specifically  for  a  wartime  project  of  ballistic 
trajectory  calculation.   Most  people  thought  that  these 
computers  would  only  be  used  for  military  projects,  and  that 
there  would  only  be  a  need  for  three  or  four  in  the  country. 

Lage:      They  didn't  see  the  civilian  applications  for  computers? 


71 


Whinnery:   Well,  some  people  undoubtedly  did,  but  most  didn't. 
Lage:      And  these  were  all  digital-based  computers? 

Whinnery:   The  electronic  digital  computers.   Of  course,  the  first  ones 

used  vacuum  tubes,  and  were  not  nearly  as  powerful  as  a  laptop 
computer  today.   There  were  rooms  full  of  vacuum  tubes,  and 
rotating  magnetic  drums  for  storage. 

But  anyway,  the  project  Paul  Morton  started  was  a  key 

project,  and  very,  very  important  in  our  getting  into  the 

computer  field  and  in  educating  some  very  top  people  for  the 

computer  industry. 

Lage:      Should  we  mention  names  of  that  group,  or  is  that  another  story? 

Whinnery:   Al  [Albert  S.)  Hoagland,  Doug  [Douglas  C.]  Engelbart,  Torben 
Meisling,  and  John  Haanstra  are  some  of  Paul's  students,  or 
students  in  the  computer  research  project,  who  became  very 
influential  in  the  computer  industry,  but  there  are  others. 

Lage:      That's  an  interesting  story  in  itself  that  really  should  be 
documented. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  it  certainly  is.   When  Charles  Susskind  carried  on  his 

interview  with  me,  it  was  planned  that  Paul  would  do  one  too. 
Paul  just  didn't  feel  up  to  it,  I  guess. 

Lage:      He's  still  alive,  though? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Until  recently  at  least,  he  played  tennis  every  morning. 
[Paul  Morton  died  May  2,  1995.  -J.R.W.] 

Lage:      That  would  be  nice  if  we  could  get  at  least  a  brief  interview 
with  him. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   He  was  a  terribly  important  person  in  the  buildup  of  the 

department,  for  his  leadership  as  well  as  his  computer  research. 

Lage:      Did  his  research  go  on  in  the  direction  that  computers  have 

taken,  or  was  it  more  this  initial  thrust  that  was  important? 

Whinnery:   In  addition  to  his  computer  research,  he  started  the  first 
computer  service  center  on  the  campus.   But  when  he  became 
division  chairman,  he  had  less  time  for  either  activity  and 
others  had  to  take  over  the  leadership.   So  I  suppose  the  key 
contribution  to  the  computer  program  was  in  his  initial  thrust. 


72 


Returning  to  UC  Berkeley 


Lage:      Anything  else  we  should  say  about  that  earlier  period? 

Whinnery:   Maybe  one  other  point  about  my  return  to  Berkeley.   I  mentioned 
the  work  of  Sam  Silver  in  convincing  me,  but  there  was  also 
encouragement  from  some  of  the  graduate  students  I  had  worked 
with,  especially  from  Mai  Currie.   He  had  done  a  master's  thesis 
with  me,  which  at  that  time  were  substantial  pieces  of  work.  He 
visited  me  once  when  I  was  at  Hughes,  trying  to  convince  me  to 
return.   Mai  Currie,  as  you  know,  later  became  CEO  of  Hughes 
Aircraft  Company. 

Lage:      Was  he  going  to  be  going  on  for  his  Ph.D.,  and  he  wanted  you  to 
come  up  and  guide  that? 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      So  the  tie  to  the  graduate  students  provided  an  ongoing 
relationship  to  the  university? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  and  although  Sam's  influence  was  greatest,  Mai's  certainly 
had  an  effect. 

Lage:      It  reminded  you  of  that  part  of  the  university  that  was  missing 
in  industry,  perhaps. 

Whinnery :   That ' s  right . 


Morrough  O'Brien  and  Sam  Silver 


Lage:      From  looking  at  some  of  the  correspondence,  particularly  with 
Sam  Silver,  it  does  look  like  the  two  of  you  were  planning  a 
lot.  You'd  had  discussions  about  what  direction  the  department 
should  take  on  an  ongoing  basis. 

Whinnery:  Yes.  Certainly  we  were  trying  to  look  at  it. 

Lage:      So  it  struck  me  that,  although  in  your  piece  that  you  did  for 
Clark  Kerr1  a  lot  of  credit  is  given  to  0'Brien--as  I'm  sure  it 


'Draft  of  a  chapter  on  the  College  of  Engineering  in  the  1950s, 
prepared  for  inclusion  in  a  work-in-process  by  Clark  Kerr,  on  the  his  years 
as  chancellor  at  Berkeley.   See  Appendix  A. 


73 

should  be—but  Silver  refers  to  pushing  O'Brien  to  develop  the 
graduate  program  and  pushing  him  to  hire  a  research  faculty. 
Should  we  be  sure  that  that  gets  recorded? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  but  I  think  again  for  the  college  as  a  whole,  O'Brien 

deserves  a  tremendous  amount  of  credit  for  the  number  of  areas 
that  he  was  trying  to  build- -the  faculty,  the  students,  the 
facilities  and  research  support. 

Lage:      He  seemed  to  have  had  a  broad  conception. 

Whinnery:   He  had  a  very  broad  conception,  and  I  often  refer  to  it  as  a 
systems  engineering  approach.   You  couldn't  build  one  area 
without  the  others  that  supported  it.   But  although  he  didn't 
ignore  electrical  engineering,  he  spent  less  time  with 
electrical  engineering  than  with  any  of  the  other  major 
departments.   I  suppose  that's  partly  because  of  his  background. 
I  don't  think  it  was  because  he  felt  we  were  at  that  time  so 
strong  that  he  didn't  have  to.   And  I  think  that  Sam  felt  more 
could  be  done. 

Lage:      Sam,  too,  seemed  to  have  a  conception  of  what  could  be  and  what 
should  be. 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes,  that's  right.   He  was  tremendously  important  in  setting 
standards  for  all  of  us. 

Lage:      What  kind  of  a  person  was  he? 

Whinnery:   He  was  a  very  quiet  person,  but  he  could  be  quite  scathing  for 
projects  or  persons  that  he  thought  were  going  in  the  wrong 
direction.   Very  thoughtful,  and  a  very  strong  theoretical 
person,  not  only  in  electromagnetic  theory  but  in  other  areas  of 
applied  physics.   I  learned  a  lot  from  him.   I  came  thinking 
that  I  knew  a  lot  about  electromagnetics,  having  written  the 
book,  but  I  went  to  his  graduate  courses,  and  learned  a  lot 
more.   I  also  learned  that  nobody  knows  it  all. 

Lage:      Especially  in  a  field  like  that,  with  everything  advancing  at 
once. 

Whinnery:   And  he  was  a  very  good  friend.   Our  families  did  a  lot  of  things 
together. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  families  of  the  same  age  group? 


74 


Whinnery:   I  think  his  children  were  a  little  older  than  ours,  but  they 
were  roughly  the  same. 

Lage:      And  how  about  his  skill  or  adeptness  in  getting  research  money? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  that  was  tremendous.   Because  of  his  contacts  coming  from 

the  MIT  lab  and  his  later  work  at  the  Naval  Research  Laboratory, 
he  knew  the  key  players  in  the  military  research  organizations 
in  Washington,  and  was  very  highly  respected. 

Lage:      Did  O'Brien  recruit  him,  do  you  know? 

Whinnery:   My  impression  is  that  Reukema  made  the  contact,  in  a  committee 
they  were  on  together  concerning  antennas  for  the  military.   At 
that  stage,  I  had  no  role  in  it. 


Electronics  Research  Lab:   Establishment  and  Federal  Funding 


Lage:      Should  we  turn  to  the  lab,  to  your  coming  back  and  heading  up 
the  lab? 

Whinnery:   All  right. 

Lage:      Had  the  lab  just  been  formed? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   At  that  time  there  were  three  major  projects,  the 

resnatron  project  of  Sloan's,  the  antenna  project,  which  had 
changed  from  Bureau  of  Ships  to  ONR  [Office  of  Naval  Research] 
sponsorship,  and  Paul's  computer  project.   These  were  sort  of 
independent  and  somewhat  competitive.   They  didn't  necessarily 
have  the  same  salary  scales  for  students,  for  example,  and 
Silver  thought  this  wrong.   I  think  it  was  his  impetus  that  got 
O'Brien  to  set  up  a  committee  to  recommend  how  to  coordinate 
things  better. 

At  that  time,  there  were  models  at  MIT  and  at  Stanford  of 
electronics  research  labs,  where  there  was  more  cooperation  and 
uniformity,  and  more  original  ways  of  going  after  other 
projects.   So  the  committee  proposal  was  to  set  up  such  a 
laboratory.   Silver  could  have  been  the  first  director,  but  at 
that  time,  he  chose  not  to  be. 

But  O'Brien  chose  not  to  go  through  the  committee  work  of 
getting  it  as  a  formal  organized  research  unit  and  instead  set 
it  up  within  the  department. 


75 


Lage:      On  sort  of  an  informal  basis? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  and  I  was  made  vice  chairman  of  Electrical  Engineering  in 
charge  of  it. 

Lage:      Was  there  a  reason  for  not  making  it  formal? 

Whinnery:   I  think  it  was  just  not  to  go  through  the  committee  work  of 

setting  it  up.   It  goes  through  many  committees  and  finally  to 
the  regents.   Organized  research  unit  approvals  are  looked  at 
very  carefully,  and  quite  properly. 

Lage:      So  that  was  done  later? 

Whinnery:   That  was  done  at  the  time  I  became  department  chair.   Silver 

then  agreed  that  he  would  be  director,  provided  the  laboratory 
could  be  set  up  formally,  and  that  was  done. 

Lage:      As  I  was  looking  at  this  kind  of  from  a  distance,  it  really 

seems  like  an  important  story  historically  because  this  was  an 
era  when  federal  support  for  research  just  grew  dramatically. 
Maybe  it's  an  era  that's  ending;  I  don't  know  what  you  think 
about  that . 


Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Yes,  it  certainly  is  changing.   At  that  time,  nearly  anyone  with 
a  good  idea  could  get  support  from  one  agency  or  another. 
That's  not  true  now. 

So  I  think  this  should  be  part  of  our  story. 

Yes.   The  ONR,  I  believe,  was  the  first  of  the  military  research 
organizations,  with  the  Office  of  Scientific  Research  of  the  air 
force,  and  the  Army  Research  Office  following  soon  after.   And 
then  NSF  was  started  in  1950  following  Vannevar  Bush's  report 
"Science—the  Endless  Frontier."  Bush  was  director  of  the 
Office  of  Scientific  Research  and  Development  during  the  war. 

Did  all  of  these  organizations  equally  fund  engineering  and 
science? 


Yes,  both  were  funded  but  not  equally. 
NSF  were  quite  limited  at  first. 


Funds  for  engineering  in 


When  you  were  director  of  the  lab--or  informal  director, 
whatever  we  should  call  you- -was  this  part  of  your  job,  to  get 
research  grants? 

Yes,  but  I  was  never  as  good  at  that  as  Silver  and  some  of  the 
other  directors.  But  I  did  spend  a  great  deal  of  time  with 


76 


funding  for  the  resnatron  project.   The  Wright  Air  Development 
Center,  which  supported  that  project,  was  interested  in  getting 
tubes  to  use  in  systems,  and  I  mentioned  earlier  the  difficulty 
we  had  in  getting  Dave  Sloan  to  finish  a  project.  He  always  had 
a  new  idea,  better  than  the  one  he  was  working  on.  There  was 
good  work  and  good  students  who  got  their  degrees  through  the 
project.  Looking  back  on  it,  I'm  amazed  at  the  patience  of  the 
Wright  Field  people.   Every  year  it  would  be  the  same  story, 
that  the  tube  they'd  hoped  to  get  had  been  abandoned  because  we 
had  a  better  idea. 

Lage:      They  were  looking  for  an  end  product? 

Whinnery:  Yes,  so  a  lot  of  my  time  was  spent  in  trying  to  get  something 
finished  on  this  end,  and  trying  to  explain  on  the  other  end 
that  we  had  accomplished  something.   You  had  a  query  [in  a  pre- 
interview  letter]  about  why  I  once  made  the  comment  that  it  was 
one  of  the  worst  administrative  experiences  I  had.   I  had 
forgotten  I  said  it,  but  it  must  have  been  with  respect  to  being 
in  that  middle-person  position. 

Other  research  funding  activities  were  to  obtain  support 
for  new  faculty  members.   I  believe  we  helped  George  Matthei 
(now  an  emeritus  professor  at  UC  Santa  Barbara)  when  he  was 
getting  started. 

Lage:      So  the  faculty  would  come  up  with  the  projects  that  they  were 
interested  in  and  wanted  help  in  finding  support? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  and  it  still  is  that  way.   The  ideas  have  to  come  from  the 
faculty.  The  director  of  ERL  suggests  agencies  that  might  be 
interested.   The  director  also  visits  agencies  to  help  sell 
specific  proposals  and  to  find  the  agency's  interests  for  the 
future.   But  the  research  proposals  come  from  the  individual 
faculty. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  much  staff  support? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Aleen  Simmons,  who  was  first  a  secretary  and  later  an 

administrative  assistant,  was  very  good.   And  then  one  of  the 
engineers  on  the  antenna  project,  Dayton  Axtell,  was  very  good 
at  making  arrangements,  and  helped  greatly. 

Lage:      Who  did  the  actual  writing  up  of  the  grant  proposals?   That 

seems  to  be  such  a  big  thing  today.   Would  that  be  done  by  the 
faculty? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  although  we  worked  with  them.   For  new  faculty  especially, 
and  for  proposals  that  were  initially  turned  down,  we  tried  to 


77 


help.   But  the  faculty  would  write  the  proposals  and  the 
reports.   We  spent  quite  a  bit  of  time  working  with  them  on  the 
reports.  At  that  time,  monthly  reports  were  required  for  many 
of  the  projects,  and  quarterly  reports  on  nearly  all.  Very  few 
grants  now  have  that  requirement. 

Lage:  That's  pretty  rigorous. 

Whinnery:  Yes.   So  somewhere  there  are  files  and  files  of  reports. 

Lage:  Let's  not  look  at  those.   [laughter] 

Whinnery:  No. 

Lage:  Later  I  saw  in  your  papers  that  you  were  on  the  NSF  committee 
that  reviewed  proposals,  or  reviewed  the  process  of  reviewing 
proposals . 

Whinnery:   I've  been  on  several  NSF  committees.   I  was  on  the  advisory 
committee  for  engineering,  which  was  first  a  section,  then  a 
division,  and  presently  a  directorate.   The  biggest  job,  a 
number  of  years  back,  was  as  chairman  of  a  committee  which  had 
to  do  with  applied  research  in  NSF.   I've  been  on  other 
committees  to  review  proposals.   But  I'm  not  sure  which 
committee  you're  thinking  of. 

Lage:      Well,  this  is  out  of  context.   They  seemed  to  be  reviewing  the 

process  of  approval,  and  there  was  some  talk  about  maybe  an  old- 
boy  network  type  of-- 

Whinnery:   The  peer  review  system. 

Lage:      Right,  the  peer  review  system,  that  was  it.   Was  there  anything 
that  formal  in  the  early  days?  Were  there  formal  processes  of 
review? 

Whinnery:   Different  agencies  work  differently.   NSF  uses  peer  review,  but 
sometimes  by  mail  and  sometimes  in  group  meetings.  The  Army 
Research  Office  has  used  the  National  Research  Council  to  manage 
its  peer  review.   I'm  not  sure  if  that's  still  the  case.   In 
some  agencies  the  project  manager  simply  decides  which  proposals 
are  to  be  supported  depending  upon  agency  interests  and  budget 
limitations. 

Lage:      Was  there  a  sense  that  if  they  were  defense-related,  there  was 
eagerness  of  the  government  to  support  the  research? 

Whinnery:   For  the  defense  agencies,  that  was  certainly  the  case,  but  most 
of  the  time  they  hoped  for  commercial  "spinoff."  And  this 


78 


happened- -the  most  important  example  being  that  of  computers, 
which  we  discussed  earlier.   Only  with  the  Mansfield  amendment 
was  specific  justification  for  defense  use  required  for  all  DOD- 
supported  research. 

Lage:      When  was  that? 

Whinnery:   During  the  Vietnam  War.   Congress  passed  this  amendment  that  any 
research  supported  by  DOD  had  to  be  shown  to  be  relevant  to  DOD. 

Lage:      What  was  the  impetus  there,  I  wonder? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know.  Wasn't  Mansfield  opposed  to  the  war?  So  maybe  he 
was  trying  to  separate  the  issues.   I've  forgotten  the 
arguments. 

Lage:      We'll  get  to  that  later.   Here  we  are  back  in  the  fifties,  and 
no  one  was  thinking  of  issues  like  that.   It  really  didn't  come 
up  at  that  time,  did  it,  whether  it  was  wise  to  be  so-- 

Whinnery:   No,  it  didn't.   It  was  simply  understood  by  everybody  who  had 
been  through  the  experience  that  science  was  applicable  to 
defense.   And,  obviously,  to  civilian  life  too.   But  still,  the 
majority  of  the  money  was  coming  through  defense  agencies. 


More  on  Morroueh  O'Brien  and  on  Organizing  EE  Research 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


What  other  things  should  we  discuss  in  relation  to  the  lab? 
I  diverting  you  with  minor  questions? 


Am 


You've  mentioned  relationships  with  O'Brien,  and  there  are  a 
couple  of  interesting  stories.   I  had  almost  no  firsthand 
relationship  with  him.   I  worked  through  the  department 
chairman,  who  was  first  McFarland  and  then  Morton.  We  kept  in 
good  contact,  but  there  was  little  contact  with  O'Brien.   In  one 
incident,  though,  he  started  to  transfer  our  laboratory  to  the 
Institute  of  Engineering  Research  rather  than  the  department. 
This  made  a  lot  of  sense  in  some  ways.  We  worked  through  the 
Institute  of  Engineering  Research.   Paki  [Henry]  Schade  was  its 
very  fine  director,  and  very  easy  to  work  with. 

You  had  worked  with  him  before? 

Yes.   It  was  a  service  organization  that  processed  our  grants 
and  did  much  of  the  accounting.   Schade  called  me  up  and  said, 
"Did  you  know  that  you'd  been  put  under  me?"  and  I  said,  "No,  I 


79 


didn't  know."  He  said,  "Well,  what  do  you  think  about  it?"  I 
don't  remember  the  details  of  what  I  said,  but  I  didn't  want  to 
lose  the  close  tie  with  the  department.   Although,  as  an 
organized  research  unit,  it  is  interdisciplinary  and  works  with 
several  departments,  the  majority  of  electronics  research  is  in 
Electrical  Engineering. 

ti 

Whinnery:   Schade,  as  I  recall,  said,  "Well,  I  don't  see  any  reason  to 
change  the  relationship  we  now  have;  it's  working."  So  he 
called  O'Brien,  who  said,  "Oh,  well,  it  wasn't  very  important, 
so  leave  it  the  way  it  was."  But  it  did  bother  me  that  it  had 
happened  without  prior  discussion. 

There  was  another  incident  involving  a  number  of  lathes  and 
milling  machines,  which  we  had  mostly  obtained  through  the 
Wright  Air  Development  contract. 

Lage:      It's  Wright  Air? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  after  the  Wright  Brothers,  Wright  Air  Development  Center, 
in  Dayton,  Ohio.   Anyway,  the  machines  were  in  a  shop  in  the 
bottom  floor  of  Cory  [Hall],  and  nominally  assigned  to  the 
college.   Dayton  Axtell  one  day  called  me  up,  "Did  you  know 
there's  a  Bigge  [Bigge  Crane  and  Rigging  Company]  truck  going  to 
move  those  out  to  the  field  station?"  And  I  said,  "No,  I 
didn't,"  so  we  went  down  and  stopped  it  until  we  could  find  what 
was  happening.   O'Brien  had  decided  to  consolidate  machine  shops 
with  these  machines,  which  were  nominally  under  the  college,  but 
the  fact  that  it  was  happening  without  discussion  was  what 
bothered  me.   I  think  eventually  we  got  some  agreement  on  what 
could  be  moved  and  what  we  needed  really  close  at  hand. 

Lage:      That  is  interesting  that  he  would  do  that  without  thinking  about 
consulting. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   As  you  know,  I'm  a  great  admirer  of  Mike  and  all  he  did  in 
building  up  the  college,  but  at  that  particular  time,  I  wasn't 
very  happy  with  the  modus  operandi. 

Lage:      Right.   It's  the  style  of  leadership  that  maybe  has  disappeared, 
the  one-man  show. 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know. 

But  on  a  more  positive  note,  we  had  a  committee  that  met 
regularly.   Silver  of  course  was  a  very  strong  member,  but  there 
were  representatives  from  each  of  the  research  groups.   We  were 


80 


trying  to  work  out  common  policies  for  the  graduate  students. 
At  that  time  it  was  quite  variable  as  to  how  graduate  students 
were  paid,  and  even  whether  they  could  use  paid  work  for  their 
thesis.   Some  groups  would  not  let  them  use  anything  for  a 
thesis  for  which  they'd  been  paid. 

Lage:      Some  groups  within  engineering,  or  across  campus? 

Whinnery:   Certainly  within  engineering,  and  I  suppose  across  campus  and 
across  the  various  campuses.   The  concept  of  a  research 
assistant,  with  uniform  policies,  was  developed  later.   I  think 
we  had  a  fairly  strong  role  in  developing  this  model,  which 
already  existed  at  MIT  and  Stanford. 

Lage:      And  what  were  the  key  things  in  developing  that? 

Whinnery:   Well,  that  it  would  be  looked  at  more  as  a  fellowship  than  a 

job,  with  a  uniform  pay  scale.   Now  this  concept  is  universal, 
but  at  that  stage  it  was  not.   So  our  effort  was  to  work  out 
these  details  between  our  three  principal  groups,  and  then  to 
have  them  approved  with  the  campus. 

Lage:      I  assume  you  included  that  they  could  do  their  thesis  research 
and  get  paid  for  it. 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes. 

Lage:      Was  there  a  sense  of  competition  with  the  other  schools  for  good 
graduate  students? 

Whinnery:   Sure.   We  had  some  very  good  students,  but  we  certainly  did  not 
have  the  uniformity  of  standards  that  Stanford  or  MIT  had- -I 
keep  coming  back  to  those  two. 

Lage:      So  when  you  had  a  committee,  you  were  looking  at  other  schools 
to  develop  the  standards. 

Whinnery :   Sure . 

Lage:      These  years  that  we're  talking  about  from  the  time  you  came  back 
here  in  '52  to  the  time  you  left  the  deanship,  that's  only 
eleven  years,  and  it  was  during  that  period  that  Berkeley  rose 
up  to  become  one  of  the  top  two  engineering  schools .   So  all  of 
these  things  must  have  been  very  important  in  the  progress. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Again,  let  me  say  that  what  O'Brien  was  doing  for  the 
college  as  a  whole  was  terribly  important.   But  in  our 
department  certainly,  the  role  of  this  group  was  critical. 


81 


Lage:      Well,  I  know  it's  just  one  portion,  but  after  all,  it's  the  one 
we're  talking  about. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Sure. 


Patents  on  Faculty  Research 


Lage:      This  came  up  in  your  papers  and  I  wondered  if  it  was  important: 
there  was  some  discussion  about  policies  on  patents  for  faculty 
research  products.   Was  this  a  period  when  that  was  being  worked 
out? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   At  that  stage  we  were  probably  more  careful  than  we've 

been  since  in  submitting  things  for  patent  review.   But  it's  not 
been  a  major  issue  in  development  of  the  department.   There  are 
a  few  patents  from  the  department  that  have  paid  off,  but  for 
the  most  part,  it's  hard  to  market  the  things  that  come  out  of 
research.   There  is  also  the  feeling  that  the  main  purpose  of 
the  university  is  to  put  things  in  the  public  domain.   There  are 
still  people  that  differ  on  this  view.   As  you  know,  at  the 
university  level,  there  has  been  a  lot  of  argument  that  we 
should  do  more  in  exploiting  our  innovative  ideas. 

But  at  that  period,  we  tried  to  submit  to  the  patent 
department  any  idea  that  seemed  original.   And  it  was  time- 
consuming  if  the  university  decided  to  follow  up. 

Lage:      But  there  was  never  an  issue  over  whether  faculty  might  be  able 
to  retain  the  patents  themselves?   Is  that  standard  at  all  the 
universities,  that  the  university  owns  the  rights  to  a  faculty 
member's  research  developments? 

Whinnery:   I'm  not  sure  of  the  numbers  in  the  current  agreement,  but  the 
basic  idea  is  that  revenue  is  shared  between  university  and 
inventor  if  the  university  decides  to  take  out  the  patent.   If 
it  decides  not  to,  the  inventor  can  have  the  rights  but  must 
bear  the  costs  of  the  patent  procedure.   Of  course  the  agency 
supporting  the  research  may  have  rights  also,  if  spelled  out  in 
the  grant  or  contract. 

Lage:      What  about  the  rights  of  industry,  if  it's  an  industrial 
contract  that  the  faculty  member  is  working  under? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   That  has  been  a  difficult  issue,  not  only  for  industry- 
supported  research  but  also  for  visitors  from  industry.  Our 


82 


visitors  from  Bell  Laboratories,  IBM,  GE,  and  other  industries 
have  contributed  a  lot  to  our  programs . 

Lage:      Visiting  professors? 

Whinnery:  They  are  usually  given  the  title  of  visiting  lecturer. 

Appointments  are  typically  for  one  year  but  may  be  more  or  less, 
The  university  would  want  the  visitors  to  sign  a  patent 
agreement,  and  their  company  would  object  on  the  grounds  that 
many  of  the  ideas  they  would  contribute  were  started  in  their 
company.   We  had  a  couple  we  were  never  able  to  work  out.   That 
got  to  be  a  major  issue  with  IBM  in  particular  that  other 
chairpersons  had  to  struggle  with,  and  I  believe  finally  got 
some  sort  of  agreement. 


The  Loyalty  Oath,  and  Classified  Research 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Talking  about  signing  reminded  me  of  something  else  we  didn't 
discuss  earlier:   the  loyalty  oath,  and  how  that  played  out  in 
the  College  of  Engineering. 


I  guess  it  wasn't  much  of  an  issue, 
people  signed  it. 


I  suppose  that  means  that 


Was  the  ill-feeling  on  the  campus--do  you  remember  any  spinoffs 
from  that  in  the  college? 

I  don't  remember  that  it  affected  us  much.   There  were  certainly 
individuals  in  the  college  who  supported  the  non-signers,  and  a 
number  of  us  contributed  to  a  fund  to  help  those  not  getting 
paid.   But  I  think  it  was  much  more  of  an  issue,  understandably, 
in  the  social  sciences. 

Especially  since  you  were  working  on  a  lot  of  government 
contracts.   Did  you  have  to  sign  things  for  that  to  get 
clearance? 

Yes.   I  guess  that  was  why  it  didn't  seem  so  much  of  an  issue; 
we  had  already  signed  so  many  things,  getting  clearance. 

Were  a  lot  of  the  research  projects  classified? 

At  the  beginning  there  were  some,  but  it  was  fairly  quickly 
realized  that  we  were  not  in  a  position  to  have  the  security 
that  was  needed  for  classified  work. 


83 


Lage:      All  your  graduate  students  would  have  to  be  investigated. 
Whinnery:   That's  right. 

Lage:      Was  that  an  issue,  the  question  of  should  the  university  do 
classified  research? 

Whinnery:   Many  persons  objected  in  principle  but  it  was  also  obvious  to 
nearly  everyone  that  it  was  impractical. 

Lage:      Even  obvious  to  the  government  agencies? 

Whinnery:   I  think  so,  yes.   They  realized  that  universities  were  not  the 
right  place  to  do  their  classified  research.   I  guess  there  are 
still  some  classified  projects  in  some  universities,  but  they're 
now  a  rarity. 


VI   CHAIR,  DIVISION  OF  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING,  1956  TO  1958 


Division  versus  Department 


Lage:      We  don't  want  to  get  too  compartmentalized  into  time  periods, 

but  should  we  move  on  to  your  chairmanship  of  the  division?   It 
still  was  a  division. 

Whinnery:   It  still  was  a  division,  although  I've  been  calling  it  a 
department  most  of  the  time. 

Lage:      Does  that  make  a  difference? 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      It  meant  you  didn't  have  budgetary  control? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   O'Brien  set  up  a  Department  of  Engineering  of  which  he  was 
the  chair  as  well  as  being  dean  of  the  college  so  that  he  then 
had  budget  control.   Since  appointments  initiate  in  a 
department,  whereas  a  dean  normally  is  only  in  the  review 
process  of  an  appointment,  this  gave  him  much  more  control  in 
the  early  stages.   He  felt  that  was  a  key  point  in  building  up 
the  college.   I  think  at  the  time  that  he  did  it,  it  was  a  good 
idea,  but  as  the  divisions  became  stronger  and  stronger,  it 
became  obvious  that  it  was  just  an  annoyance.   At  that  point  I 
don't  think  it  changed  things  very  much.   We  initiated  the 
appointments . 

Lage:      You  put  forth  the  recommendations,  and  did  he  take  an  active 
role  in  evaluating  them? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   He  had  a  very  good,  very  strong  confidential  review 

committee,  even  though  I  don't  think  it  is  in  the  senate  manual. 
Its  recommendations  were  very  helpful  and  we  were  all  working  to 
get  very  high-quality  faculty,  but  the  whole  process  of  getting 


85 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


an  appointment  through  was  very  lengthy.   I  guess  it  still  is. 
At  the  time,  I  was  very  impatient  with  it. 


I  can  guess, 
[laughter] 


I  ran  across  that  in  some  of  your  papers,  too. 


I'm  sure  you  did.   But  looking  back  on  it,  I  think  that's  one  of 
the  things  that  has  kept  the  standards  of  the  university,  the 
careful  senate  review. 


Paul  Morton's  Resignation;  Whinnery 'a  Appointment  as  Chair 


Lage:      You  came  in  as  chair  because  Paul  Morton  resigned  in  some 

frustration.   Do  you  want  to  talk  about  that,  to  set  the  scene 
here? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Actually  looking  back,  there  were  quite  a  few  excellent 
appointments  made  during  Paul's  chairmanship.   Maybe  it's  a 
little  hard  to  see  why  he  was  so  frustrated,  but  certainly  we 
didn't  have  the  faculty  we  needed  for  the  students  who  were 
admitted.   At  that  time,  there  was  no  screening  beyond  the  state 
engineering  exams.   Once  the  students  were  admitted  to 
engineering,  they  could  choose  any  department.   We  were  getting 
large  numbers  of  students,  and  having  a  hard  time  appointing 
enough  faculty  to  teach  them.   So  Morton  felt  that  we  were  not 
getting  the  support  from  Dean  O'Brien  that  we  should  have.   I 
suppose  he  was  turned  down  in  a  specific  request,  so  wrote  a 
letter  of  resignation  in  which  he  described  what  was  needed. 
O'Brien  looked  at  it  very  carefully,  and  worked  with  Chancellor 
Kerr  to  obtain  more  appointments.   So  I  came  in  with,  I  think, 
six  or  seven  new  authorizations. 

Lage:      Had  O'Brien  initially  wanted  electrical  engineering  to  restrict 
students  also?  Was  that  one  of  his  solutions? 

Whinnery:   No,  I  don't  think  so.   I  think  his  idea  was  to  be  sure  that  we 
had  students  with  the  aptitude  for  engineering.   At  that  time, 
in  most  all  undergraduate  programs,  there  was  a  tremendous 
dropout  level,  and  O'Brien  felt  this  very  inefficient.   Much  of 
it  was  because  many  students  didn't  have  the  math  background  or 
capabilities.   So  he  instituted  examinations  at  the  freshman  and 
junior  levels,  but  I  think  he  thought  of  it  as  for  engineering 
as  a  whole  rather  than  for  each  specialty. 

Lage:      But  he  didn't  expect  you  to  solve  your  problems  in  the 
department,  or  division,  by  reducing  the  students? 


86 


Whinnery:   No.   Not  that  I  know  of.   And  although  we  limit  by  department 
now,  in  the  ideal  you'd  like  to  give  students  a  free  choice  of 
major. 

Lage:      So  Paul  Morton  made  a  stand  and  made  it  a  little  bit  easier  for 
you  coming  to  head  the  division. 

Whinnery:   Certainly. 

Lage:      You  had  seven  appointments? 

Whinnery:   I  think  it  was  about  seven  open  positions. 


Recruiting  Faculty 


Lage:      Let's  talk  about  how  you  recruit  and  choose  faculty. 

Whinnery:   At  that  time,  I  worked  with  a  very  good  executive  committee- 
Silver,  Paul  Morton,  Bob  Saunders,  and  Don  [Donald  0.]  Pederson, 
although  he  was  only  an  assistant  professor  when  he  became  a 
member.   It  was  agreed  that  he  would  leave  every  time  we  were 
considering  personnel  matters  at  higher  levels.   He  was  already 
becoming  a  very  important  person  in  the  department  and  has  been 
one  of  the  key  leaders—heading  the  Electronics  Research  Lab, 
starting  the  program  in  integrated  circuits,  and  developing  the 
SPICE  [Simulation  Program  witn  Integrated  Circuit  Emphasis] 
program  which  started  our  strong  role  in  CAD  [computer-aided 
design] .   The  SPICE  program  is  now  the  most  universally  used 
computer-aided  design  program. 

So  the  first  goal  was  to  determine  areas  that  were 
important  to  build  in.   By  that  time,  we  had  good  strength  in 
microwaves  and  electromagnetics,  so  the  three  that  we  had  as 
priorities  were  computers,  solid  state  electronics,  which  was 
just  beginning  to  be  important,  and  information  theory,  which 
now  we'd  call  systems  theory  or  communications.   This  last  was 
becoming  an  important  field  in  tying  together  all  of  the  systems 
work. 

Then  we  advertised,  and  asked  those  traveling  to 
conferences  or  other  universities  to  look  for  prospects. 

Lage:      How  do  you  advertise? 

Whinnery:   In  the  professional  journals,  there  would  be  pages  and  pages  of 
open  positions.   There  still  are.   Now  you  have  to  advertise. 


87 


Lage:      That's  what  I  was  thinking.   I  had  the  impression  that  this  kind 
of  open  advertisement  was  something  of  a  more  recent 
requirement . 

Whinnery:   I  think  at  that  time  it  was  not  a  statutory  issue,  but  a  way  of 
reaching  people. 

Lage:      Did  many  people  come  in  that  way,  or  did  most  of  them  come  in 
through  direct  referral? 

Whinnery:   Most  of  them  came  in  through  personal  contacts,  but  some  who 
applied  were  appointed  after  appropriate  evaluation. 

Lage:      Was  the  idea  to  get  young  people  that  would  grow  with  the 

university,  or  to  get  some  experts  and  people  with  established 
reputations? 

Whinnery:   Some  of  each.   Just  to  take  a  couple  of  examples:   Don  Pederson 
was  appointed  during  Paul  Morton's  chairmanship.   He  had 
applied,  and  I  had  the  pleasant  job  of  interviewing  him  in  New 
York.   He  was  then  at  Bell  Laboratories.   He  quickly  became  a 
key  person  in  the  department,  as  mentioned  earlier. 

Lage:      Did  you  know  him  before? 

Whinnery:  Yes,  I  had  met  him  when  he  was  a  graduate  student  at  Stanford. 
I  didn't  know  him  well,  but  knew  he  was  highly  regarded  by  his 
thesis  supervisor,  Joe  Pettit. 

Lage:      Was  it  hard  to  convince  him  to  come? 

Whinnery:   No,  since  he  had  applied,  he  was  motivated  to  come.   There  was 
some  negotiation  on  the  offer,  but  he  wasn't  hard  to  recruit. 
Once  he  was  here,  he  talked  to  two  of  his  colleagues  at  Bell 
Labs,  Ernie  [Ernest  S.]  Kuh  and  Charles  Desoer,  who  also  became 
very  key  members  of  the  department.   So  that  was  one  of  the 
contacts. 

Other  somewhat  different  examples  were  Vic  [Victor  H.] 
Rumsey  and  Lotfi  Zadeh,  who  were  already  well  established  at 
other  universities.  At  that  time  we  tried  not  to  "raid"  other 
universities,  though  the  only  formal  agreements  I  know  of  were 
with  Stanford  and  other  UC  campuses .   So  we  approached  such 
people  only  if  we  learned  of  their  interest.  Rumsey  was  then  at 
Illinois  and  Sam  Silver  learned  of  his  interest.   We  had 
discussed  Zadeh,  but  did  not  approach  him  until  we  were  told  by 
one  of  our  faculty  members  that  he  was  considering  leaving 
Columbia.   Within  minutes  we  reached  him  by  phone,  set  up  a 
meeting  in  New  York,  and  that  important  appointment  followed. 


88 


Lage:      When  you  were  looking  at  people,  were  personal  qualities 
important  at  all?  Was  this  talked  about? 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      What  kind  of  aspects  were  looked  at? 

Whinnery:  Well,  we'd  want  to  be  sure  that  the  person  would  work  well  with 
a  group,  be  cooperative.  We  made  some  mistakes  along  the  way, 
which  I'd  rather  not  discuss  in  detail. 

Lage:      I  can  understand  that.   But  that  was  something  you  looked  at?   I 
would  think  that  would  have  something  to  do  with  the 
collegiality  in  the  department. 

Whinnery:   I  think  so,  yes. 

Lage:      Cooperation.   Maybe  this  is  a  hard  question  to  answer:   was  it  a 
different  kind  of  person  who  would  come  to  the  university  and 
stay  in  the  academic  world,  versus  the  kind  who  went  to 
industry? 

Whinnery:   It  is  a  hard  question  to  answer.   The  first  obvious  point  is 
that  they  had  to  be  interested  in  the  university  and  realize 
that  not  all  of  the  outside  pictures  are  correct.   It  isn't  just 
an  ivory  tower,  as  some  people  think;  it  is  just  a  very  hard 
job,  but  a  rewarding  one  if  you  like  it.  There  are  certainly 
people,  if  you  think  of  the  Bell  Labs  and  the  IBM  research 
laboratories  as  examples,  that  could  well  go  either  way. 

Lage:      It's  not  that  great  a  gulf  between  the  two? 

Whinnery:   I'd  say  not,  if  you're  looking  at  organizations  like  that. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  a  way  of  judging  their  teaching  ability? 

Whinnery:   Well,  we  tried,  of  course.   Nearly  all  had  given  papers  at 

conferences,  which  provided  some  information.   Comments  from 
their  colleagues  on  how  they  explained  things  helped.   But 
that's  one  of  the  hardest  things  to  document,  even  for  people 
already  teaching. 

Lage:      Is  it  hard  to  evaluate  them  once  they're  here,  even? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   We  have  the  student  evaluations,  but  they're  not  100 

percent  accurate.  You  find  a  number  of  students,  after  they've 
been  out  a  couple  of  years,  suddenly  appreciating  an  instructor 
they  didn't  rate  very  high  when  they  were  taking  the  class. 


89 


Lage:      And  then  you  have  the  ability  to  teach  to  a  group  versus  the 

ability  to  foster  a  graduate  student,  which  may  be  two  different 
things . 

Whinnery:   Yes.   For  some  persons,  they're  good  at  one  and  not  the  other, 
but  others  are  superb  at  both. 

Lage:      So  you  didn't  come  up  with  a  foolproof  method  of  anticipating 
that  ability? 

Whinnery:  No,  I  don't  think  so,  and  as  I  say,  I  don't  think  we  even  have  a 
foolproof  way  for  people  we  know  well,  that  have  been  here  a  few 
years. 

Lage:      Once  you  got  people  here,  was  it  hard  to  keep  them? 

Whinnery:   No.   We've  had  people  leave,  usually  for  dean's  jobs  in  other 
places  or  something  like  that.   But  I'd  say  the  turnover  has 
been  small.  And  in  general,  for  someone  like  Tom  Everhart,  who 
went  from  here  to  a  dean's  job  at  Cornell,  then  to  a 
chancellorship  at  Illinois,  and  then  to  the  presidency  of 
Caltech,  the  continuing  contacts  are  good  for  us  too.   He's 
still  very  positive  about  his  experiences  here. 

Lage:      Last  time  we  talked  about  the  individual  who  asked  you  why  you 
went  back  to  the  university.   It  wasn't  Everhart,  it  was  Quate. 

Whinnery:   If  it's  Quate,  no,  he  didn't  come  here.   He  went  to  Stanford 
many  years  later.   He's  an  outstanding  person  but  I  don't 
remember  the  correspondence. 

Lage:      It  was  early  on.   It  was  about  '51  or  '52.   I  think  you 

mentioned  somewhere  that  the  [John  H.]  Mackay  [Jr.]  endowment 
helped  in  recruiting. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Mackay  was  one  of  the  pioneers  of  radio  and  had  one  of  his 
locations  on  the  West  Coast.   He  gave  money  to  a  number  of 
universities;  Harvard  has  a  very  large  Mackay  endowment.   The 
endowment  here,  when  it  was  given,  was  enough  to  support  a 
faculty  member.  But  with  inflation,  it  was  not  enough.  There 
was  worry  about  what  to  do  with  it. 

Paul  Morton  realized  that  a  good  use  was  to  bring  in 
visiting  people.   So  we've  had  a  large  number  of  distinguished 
visiting  people  here  as  Mackay  professors,  including  Dennis 
Gabor,  the  inventor  of  holography.   [Balthazar]  van  der  Pol,  the 
mathematician  famous  for  the  van  der  Pol  oscillator,  was 
another.   Peter  Elias  from  MIT  contributed  a  lot,  and  Chap  [C. 
Chapin]  Cutler  was  the  first  of  many  distinguished  visitors  from 


90 


Bell  Labs.   I'm  not  sure  all  of  these  held  the  Mackay 
appointment,  because  we  used  any  available  funds  once  we  found 
how  valuable  the  visitors  were. 

Lage:      Did  the  visitors  teach  classes? 

Whinnery:   Some  taught  regular  classes.   Sometimes  they  were  here  for  a 
shorter  period  and  gave  a  series  of  seminars,  worked  with 
graduate  students,  and  gave  advice  on  research.   In  the  early 
development  of  the  department,  these  visitors  were  especially 
important. 

Lage:      Was  it  also  a  way  of  kind  of  checking  out  people?  Did  you  ever 
bring  people  on  the  Mackay  endowment  that  you  were  considering 
as  faculty? 

Whinnery:   Bob  Brayton  is  a  recent  example,  and  I  think  there  were  others. 
But  those  who  returned  to  their  home  institution  remained  as 
friends  of  the  department  and  often  were  Ph.D.  recruiters  or 
cooperative  researchers. 


Electrical  Engineering  Curriculum  ## 


Lage:      What  we  haven't  gotten  into  in  terms  of  the  division  under  your 
leadership  is  the  curriculum  of  the  division,  and  that  seems 
like  a  big  area. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Before  Paul  Morton  became  chair,  we  had  three  or  four 

courses  at  the  junior  level,  one  in  circuits,  one  in  machines, 
and  one  in  instrumentation.   Paul  saw  the  need  for  some 
unification  and  instituted  a  seven-unit  course,  EE109,  to  bring 
more  unity  to  the  treatments. 

Lage:      To  combine  those  aspects  into  one  course? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Obviously  there  are  relationships  among  them,  and  instead 
of  trying  to  look  at  each  individually,  they  were  combined. 
Also,  you  could  avoid  some  duplication.   I  think  it  was  a  very 
important  pedagogical  idea. 

The  problem  was  in  getting  people  to  teach  the  course.   It 
was  a  tremendous  load.   Also,  you  had  to  have  very  good 
teachers,  because  if  you  had  that  much  in  one  package  and  an 
uninspiring  teacher,  it  was  a  disaster.   Nevertheless,  it  was,  I 
think,  a  very  important  step.   It  later  was  given  up  just 


91 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 


Whinnery : 


Lage: 


Whinnery: 


because  of  the  impracticality  of  getting  good  instructors  for 
this  seven-unit  course  over  the  long  term. 

Seven  units  is  a  lot. 

Some  of  that  was  lab,  so  there  were  TAs  working  with  the 
instructor,  but  it's  still  a  lot.   I  know  when  I  was  chair, 
trying  to  get  people  to  do  it  was  tremendously  difficult. 

At  that  time,  the  curriculum  was  a  very  active  subject  for 
every  department  meeting,  and  we  had  such  meetings  about  once  a 
month.  We'd  typically  go  over  one  course  in  detail  to  see  if 
changes  were  necessary  before  the  next  offering.  There  would  be 
tremendous  arguments,  but  once  issues  were  settled,  everyone 
would  go  out  and  work  together  on  getting  the  changes  made. 


What  were  the  arguments  over? 
ignited  people? 


What  kinds  of  things  really 


The  arguments  might  be  over  the  amount  of  material  in  a  course, 
the  order,  or  the  prerequisites.   But  the  major  ones  had  to  do 
with  the  extent  to  which  new  approaches,  coming  out  of  current 
research,  should  be  brought  into  undergraduate  courses.   For 
example,  control  theory  was  changing  from  a  deterministic 
subject  to  one  based  more  on  statistics,  and  it  was  not  clear 
how  rapidly  this  approach  should  be  brought  into  the 
undergraduate  control  courses,  and  the  statistics  prerequisites 
that  would  be  needed.   Another  example  was  the  role  of  the  new 
information  theory  in  changing  the  classical  communications 
courses. 

Were  the  same  kind  of  revisions  going  on  elsewhere,  do  you 
think?  Was  this  an  area  where  you  looked  to  other  schools  and 
saw  what  they  were  doing? 

Well,  yes,  we  followed  what  was  going  on  in  other  schools,  but 
at  this  point  were  beginning  to  take  a  leadership  role  in  a  lot 
of  these  things. 

It's  interesting;  maybe  I  think  this  from  the  humanities,  but  I 
think  of  professors  designing  their  own  courses,  what  they're 
going  to  cover  in  their  own  courses.  But  you're  describing  a 
different  setup. 

Probably  there's  now  less  group  discussion  than  there  was  then. 
The  review  of  the  curriculum  and  course  content  goes  on. 
There's  not  the  same  degree  of  argument  over  it  now  that  there 
was  in  that  period.   Whether  it's  good,  bad,  or  indifferent,  I 
don ' t  know . 


92 

Lage:      But  you  saw  the  education  of  the  electrical  engineer  as  a  whole. 
Each  class  seemed  to  fill  a  different  niche?   Is  that  why  so 
much  attention  was  given  to  it,  because  regardless  of  who  was 
teaching  it,  you  wanted  the  students  to  get  the  same  education? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   That  was,  at  least,  the  theory  behind  it. 


Science  versus  Application 


Lage:      Were  there  also  debates  over  how  much  science  versus  how  much 
practical  subject  matter  there  should  be? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  and  that's  still  going  on.   Of  course,  one  of  the  outside 
influences  is  the  accreditation  group.   Now,  their  emphasis  is 
making  sure  that  there  is  enough  design  experience  in  the 
curriculum.   They  felt  that  engineering  for  a  while  became  too 
scientific.   We  have  our  accreditation  coming  up  in  a  few 
months,  so  it  will  be  interesting  to  see  what  they  think  of  what 
we  have  now. 

Lage:      Who  does  the  accreditation? 

Whinnery:   It's  an  organization  called  ABET,  which  is  Accreditation  Board 
for  Engineering  and  Technology.   It  has  appointees  from  the 
various  professional  societies,  like  the  IEEE  [Institute  of 
Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineering]  and  the  ASME  [American 
Society  of  Mechanical  Engineering] ,  ASCE  [American  Society  of 
Civil  Engineering].   Teams  of  inspectors  visit,  look  at 
facilities,  faculty  qualifications,  and  course  materials.   They 
then  write  a  report,  recommending  accreditation,  removal  of 
accreditation,  or  perhaps  a  warning. 

Lage:      Has  that  happened  in  this  department? 
Whinnery:   We've  had  warnings. 
Lage:      On  what  kinds  of  things? 

Whinnery:  Maybe  not  enough  design  in  the  curriculum.  But  so  has  MIT,  so 
has  Stanford,  so  has  Caltech.  If  they  should  disaccredit  you, 
then  politically  you'd  be  in  some  trouble. 

Lage:      It's  just  interesting  that  the  universities  that  are  top  in  the 
country  are  still  being  shaped  by  the  outside--by  the 
profession,  I  guess. 


93 


Whinnery:   That's  right.   And  sometimes  it  is  frustrating.   It  depends  a 
great  deal  on  the  team  you  have.   If  you  have  a  good, 
intelligent  team  that  is  familiar  with  your  graduates,  the 
members  aren't  going  to  get  too  sticky  about  details.   But  if 
you  have  a  team  that  is  going  by  the  letters --"Well,  you  don't 
have  this  many  units  of  some  requirement,"  you  can  get  in 
trouble. 

Lage:      So  that  is  something  you  pay  attention  to. 
Whinnery:   You  have  to. 


The  Common  Lower  Division  Curriculum 


Lage:      But  this  debate  —  somehow  I  did  run  across  this  in  the  papers.   I 
can't  remember  the  particulars,  but  it  sounded  as  if  there  were 
occasions  where  faculty  really  went  at  it  over  curriculum. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   While  I  was  speaking  only  of  the  [EE]  department,  there 
were  also  tremendous  arguments  about  curriculum  in  the  college 
as  a  whole.   Much  of  it  had  to  do  with  the  lower  division. 
O'Brien  had  felt,  with  some  justice,  that  it  was  well  to  keep  a 
common  lower  division,  so  that  the  students  didn't  have  to 
choose  their  major  until  the  junior  year.   And  for  years,  that 
was  the  situation. 

That  comes  to  another  curriculum  point:   the  thing  that  was 
always  bothersome  to  EE  was  that  we  had  no  role  in  the  lower 
division.   We  would  say,  "If  students  are  choosing  a  major,  they 
don't  see  anything  from  electrical  engineering." 

Lage:      There  was  no  electrical  engineering  class  that  was  part  of  the 
lower  division  curriculum? 

Whinnery:   No.   The  courses  for  many  years  were  surveying,  drafting, 

analytical  mechanics,  and  a  materials  course.   The  surveying  and 
drafting  courses  became  modified  quite  a  bit,  and  finally  we  did 
get  an  electrical  engineering  course  [in  1963].   Don  Pederson 
and  I  taught  it  together. 

Lage:      Was  this  the  one  you  developed  the  book  for?1 


'Pederson,  Studer,  Whinnery,  Introduction  to  Electronic  Systems, 
Circuits,  and  Devices  (New  York:   McGraw-Hill,  1966). 


94 


Whinnery:   We  developed  a  book,  yes.   It  was  never  a  success. 
Lage:      How  do  you  measure  success? 

Whinnery:  [laughs]  It  wasn't  used  in  many  other  places.  It  worked  well 
here  until  we  went  to  the  quarter  system.  Then  it  didn't  work 
too  well  here. 

Lage:  So  the  course  you  developed  that  book  for  was  a  course  for  all 
engineering  students? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  for  a  while.   Then  the  college  decided  that  students  could 
start  their  major  at  the  freshman  year,  which  is  the  way  it's 
been  now  for  a  couple  of  decades. 

Lage:      That's  a  major  change. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      Was  that  something  you  were  in  favor  of? 

Whinnery:   No.   There  are  arguments  both  ways,  and  considering  the 

pressures,  it  probably  had  to  be  done  that  way.   But  I  think 
there  is  advantage  of  having  some  interchange  at  the  lower 
division,  particularly  to  give  students  a  chance  to  pick  a 
major.   When  they  are  just  out  of  high  school,  they  don't  often 
have  much  view  of  the  different  specialties.   At  the  moment  I 
don't  have  a  solution  between  the  two  alternatives. 

Lage:      Well,  it  did  seem  a  tremendous  amount  of  attention  to 

coursework,  which  is  gratifying  when  you  hear  criticisms  of  the 
university:   is  it  really  interested  in  teaching? 

Whinnery:  That's  right.  And  later,  Kuh  and  Desoer  had  a  very  innovative 
circuits  course  which  was  copied  widely  around  the  country. 

Lage:      Did  they  do  a  book  for  that?   Is  that  what  gets  copied? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   And  Zadeh  and  Desoer  in  systems  theory  had  a  major 
influence  on  those  courses . 


O'Brien's  Policy  and  Budget  Committee 


Lage:      Shall  we  say  anything  else  about  this  period?   It  seems  like 

we've  just  sort  of  skimmed  the  surface.   I'm  not  sure  what  we've 
left  out  of  leadership  in  the  division. 


95 


Whinnery:   You  have  a  question  about  relationships  with  O'Brien,  which 
we've  talked  about,  and  the  chairs  of  other  engineering 
divisions.  O'Brien  did  have  a  committee,  which  was  not  quite 
the  same  thing  as  the  dean's  coordinating  advisory  council.  He 
called  it  Policy  and  Budget  Committee,  on  which,  he  had  the 
chairs  and  a  few  selected  persons. 

Lage:      Do  you  remember  what  those  committee  meetings  were  like? 

Whinnery:   O'Brien  would  raise  matters  on  which  he  wanted  advice,  but  I 

don't  recall  many  major  issues.   In  fact  we  sometimes  joked  that 
we  talked  about  everything  but  policy  and  budget.   But  it  was  a 
place  for  the  chairs  to  get  to  know  one  another. 

The  relationships  with  the  other  divisions  were  fine.   In 
fact,  Harmer  Davis,  who  was  then  chair  of  civil  engineering, 
carried  the  ball  in  convincing  O'Brien  that  it  was  time  for  us 
to  become  departments. 

Lage:      Would  that  kind  of  thing  get  brought  up  at  the  Policy  and  Budget 
Committee,  or  was  that  too  large  an  issue? 

Whinnery:   It  was  brought  up  first  by  telephone  conversations  among  the 

chairs,  asking,  "Shouldn't  we  bring  this  up  to  O'Brien?"   Then 
there  was  a  meeting  to  discuss  the  issue.   He  sort  of  agreed.   I 
think  Clark  Kerr  may  also  have  been  asking  him  about  the  special 
organization  in  engineering,  but  I'm  not  sure. 


Clark  Kerr  and  Morrough  O'Brien 


Lage:      Do  you  know  very  much  about  what  went  on  between  Kerr  and 

O'Brien?   I  read  or  was  told  by  one  of  your  colleagues  that 
there  wasn't  much  love  lost  between  the  two  of  them. 

Whinnery:   Most  of  what  I  know  is  what  Clark  has  said  himself,  that  he 

didn't  appreciate  O'Brien  until  later  when  he  had  the  chance  to 
look  back  at  what  he  had  done,  particularly  when  the  ratings 
came  out,  which  were  very  important  to  the  university  as  a 
whole.   He  said  that  he  was  worried  about  Mike  because—well, 
first  of  all,  he  was  always  pressing  for  something.   He  got  a 
lot  of  it,  but  [laughs]  Kerr  looked  at  it  as  an  endless  pit, 
almost. 

Lage:      Of  new  faculty  and — 
Whinnery:   Faculty,  buildings-- 


96 


Lage:      Oh,  buildings,  that  would  be  a  big  thing. 

Whinnery:   Whatever.   Budgets.   I  think  now  Kerr  appreciates  that  O'Brien 
was  trying  to  build  something  major,  and  did.   But  the  other 
thing  he  has  said  is  that  he  was  worried  because  Mike  spoke  so 
much  about  the  art  of  engineering,  as  though  he  were  playing 
down  the  science  of  engineering.   But  some  of  his  own  recruiting 
of  people  like  Earl  [R.]  Parker  and  John  [E.]  Dorn,  and  Sam 
[Samuel  A.]  Schaaf,  who  was  a  mathematician,  shows  that  he  was 
quite  aware  of  the  fact  that  a  very  strong  science  base  is 
needed. 

Lage:      It  seems  that  way,  that  he  recruited  a  lot  of  scientists. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Clark  has  said  that  when  they  talked,  he  got  the 

impression  that  O'Brien  wanted  just  practicing  engineers  and  not 
persons  who  would  do  research.   And  of  course,  the  point  that 
O'Brien  was  making  is  correct:   engineering  is  different  from 
physics  and  chemistry  and  math;  if  it  weren't,  you  wouldn't  need 
a  separate  college.   But  that  doesn't  mean  to  say  that  those 
subjects  don't  play  a  key  role  in  the  background  in  the  tools 
that  you  use.   O'Brien,  in  his  writings  on  engineering 
education,  always  made  this  point. 

Lage:      I  heard  that  O'Brien  tried  to  keep  his  relationship  to  Sproul, 

and  sort  of  left  Kerr  out  of  things.   Is  that  something  you  were 
aware  of? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  really  know.   I've  heard  the  same  thing,  and  I  can 

imagine  that  it  was  true.   Many  of  the  things  that  O'Brien  did 
at  the  beginning  were  with  Sproul 's  full  support. 

Lage:      Do  you  know  much  about  the  circumstances  of  O'Brien  leaving  the 
deanship? 

Whinnery:   Not  really  beyond  what  he  said,  that  he  felt  that  the  building 
that  he  had  done  was  just  about  as  far  as  he  could  go,  and  he 
wanted  to  go  on  to  other  things.   I  think  he  felt  that  a  number 
of  the  innovations  that  he'd  started  were  either  being  turned 
down  by  the  senate,  or  not  getting  full  support  from  the 
administration. 


The  Academic  Senate  and  Engineering 


Lage:      I  want  at  some  point  to  talk  about  the  relationship  with  the 

Academic  Senate,  maybe  best  while  you're  dean.   But  was  that  a 


97 


problem  under  O'Brien,  that  the  Academic  Senate  was  putting  the 
brakes  on  some  of  the  innovations? 

Whinnery:   In  some  cases. 

Lage:      Would  that  be  hiring,  or  curriculum,  or  buildings? 

Whinnery:   Some  of  the  appointments  didn't  survive  the  senate  review.   Some 
of  these  were  of  the  engineering  type  that  didn't  have  a  strong 
research  record.   He  felt  that  a  mix  of  persons  with  an 
engineering  base  and  a  research  base  was  needed. 

Lage:      More  the  professional  engineer? 

Whinnery:   I  think  some  of  those.   But  he  also  tried,  without  success,  to 
get  chemical  engineering  into  the  college.   When  that  didn't 
happen,  he  started  process  engineering  as  something  similar  and 
certainly  in  competition.   That  caused  a  lot  of  hard  feelings  on 
the  other  side  of  the  campus. 

Lage:      He  just  changed  the  title  and  started  up  a  program  here? 

Whinnery:   He  thought  of  it  as  being  somewhat  different,  but  there  were 
enough  overlaps  that  it  certainly  didn't  sit  well  with  chem 
engineering.   Chem  engineering  and  chemistry,  of  course,  have 
always  been  very  strong  departments  and  major  players  in  the 
Academic  Senate. 

Another  issue  was  that  of  the  engineering  entrance  exams. 
Somewhat  to  my  surprise,  when  I  looked  at  the  dates,  it  seems 
that  the  stopping  of  the  exams  for  engineering  didn't  occur 
until  after  O'Brien  left,  but  I  think  the  movement  to  stop  them 
was  started  near  the  end  of  his  term. 

Lage:      So  there  was  some  resentment  that  the  college  was  putting 
students  through  this  extra  set  of  exams? 

Whinnery:   It  wasn't  so  much  resentment  as  a  philosophical  point  that  once 
students  are  admitted  to  the  university,  they  should  be  able  to 
go  into  any  program.   Of  course,  now  we  have  our  own  screening 
simply  because  we  couldn't  possibly  take  all  of  those  that  are 
admitted  to  the  university  that  want  electrical  engineering. 
But  now  it's  not  done  through  special  examinations. 

Lage:      You  evaluate  your  own  incoming  students. 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   And  I  think  they  say  they're  about  seven  to  one, 
seven  times  as  many  applicants  were  admissible  to  the  university 
as  you  could  take  in  the  department. 


98 

Lage:      So  that  was  another  issue  he  was  unhappy  about. 
Whinnery:   That's  right. 

Lage:      Is  there  sort  of  a  bias  in  the  Academic  Senate  against  the 
professional  schools,  would  you  say? 

Whinnery:   At  one  point,  yes,  but  I  don't  think  that's  true  now. 

Lage:      This  might  have  something  to  do  with  the  growth  of  stature  of 
the  college. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  and  with  the  key  people  we've  had  in  the  senate  and  the 

administration. 

Lage:      People  from  engineering,  you  mean? 
Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      Was  this  a  conscious  thing?   I  ran  across  that  somewhere,  maybe 
it  was  Paul  Morton,  urging  people  to  get  involved  in  the  senate. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   O'Brien  did  that,  Paul  Morton  certainly  did,  and  Earl 
Parker  I  know  played  a  role  in  trying  to  get  people  in  key 
positions.   He  was  one  of  the  first,  I  think,  to  be  on  the 
budget  committee. 

Lage:      That's  a  pretty  powerful  committee. 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   Bill  [William  G.]  Oldham  is  the  most  recent 
member  that  1  know  of. 

Lage:      So  that  helps. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   And  we've  had  good  people  on  other  key  committees 
including  the  Committee  on  Committees. 

Lage:      I  like  this  quote  I  saw  in  a  letter  to  you — this  was  later  when 
you  left  the  deanship- -O'Brien  wrote  you  and  said,  "The 
university  system  is  incredibly  bad,  but  there  it  is." 
[laughter]  He  was  approving  of  your  decision  to  leave  the 
deanship. 

Whinnery :   Yes . 

Lage:      Did  he  have  some  bitterness?   I  picked  this  up  in  his  oral 
history  too,  that  there  was  a  bit  of  bitterness  towards  the 
university. 


99 


Whlnnery:   Yes.   I  received  the  same  impression.   I  suppose  because  he  was 
turned  down  on  some  things  he  thought  very  important,  and 
certainly  the  mechanism  is  very  complicated — no  one  would  argue 
that. 

Lage:      The  bureaucracy. 

Whinnery:   For  someone  who  was  a  direct-action  person,  he  undoubtedly  had 
many  frustrations.   On  the  other  hand,  if  you  think  of  all  the 
support  he  got  and  all  that  he  got  accomplished,  he  shouldn't 
have  been  bitter. 

Lage:      Well,  maybe  we  should  stop  here,  and  get  into  your  deanship  next 
time.   Does  that  sound  reasonable? 


Whinnery:   Yes. 


John  R.  Whinnery's  mother,  Edith 
Mabel  (Bent)  Whinnery,  circa  1890. 

John  Whinnery  with  his  father,  Ralph 
V.  Whinnery,  Modesto,  California, 
circa  1930.   The  thresher  and 
"tractor"  pictured  were  made  by 
Ralph  Whinnery. 


The  Whinnery  family,  1970s:  Cathy,  Pat,  Barbara,  John,  and  Carol. 


Engineering  Alumni  Society  meeting,  1984,  honoring  Donald  McLaughlin  as  charter  recipient  of 
the  Distinguished  Alumnus  Award.   Left  to  right:  Deans  and  Associate  Deans  Robert  Wiegel, 
Karl  Pister,  John  Whinnery,  Virgil  Schrock,  Clyne  Garland,  Donald  McLaughlin,  A.  M.  (Mac) 
Hopkin,  George  Maslach,  Ernest  Kuh,  and  the  invaluable  executive  assistant,  Frances  Eberhart. 


Presentation  of  the  National  Medal  of  Science  to  John  R.  Whinnery,  White  House 
Rose  Garden,  June  23,  1992.  Dr.  Allan  Bromley,  Assistant  to  the  President  for 
Science  and  Technology,  President  George  Bush,  John  Whinnery. 


The  50th  anniversary  celebration  of  "the  book"  and  announcement  of  the 
John  R.  Whinnery  Chair  in  Electrical  Engineering  and  Computer  Sciences, 
May  1994.   Photographs  by  Peg  Skorpinski. 

Top:  John  Whinnery  with  many  generations  of  his  students.   Right  front, 
Ron  Schmidt,  chairman  of  the  committee  to  establish  the  Whinnery  chair. 

Bottom:  Steve  Elliott  (left)  editor  at  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  presenting 
leatherbound  copies  of  the  third  edition  of  the  classic  book,  Fields  and 
Waves  in  Communication  Electronics,  to  the  authors  (left  to  right)  Simon 
Ramo,  John  Whinnery,  and  Theodore  Van  Duzer. 


100 


VII   DEAN,  COLLEGE  OF  ENGINEERING,  1959  TO  1963 

Appointment  as  Dean 

[Interview  A:   February  16,  1994]  it 


Lage:      Today  we're  going  to  talk  about  your  deanship  of  the  college  of 
engineering  from  '59  to  '63,  which  is  really  the  focus  of  this 
series  of  interviews.   Last  time,  we  talked  about  O'Brien 
leaving  the  deanship,  and  you  evaluated,  1  thought  very  nicely, 
his  contributions.   So  let's  pick  up  with  your  appointment,  how 
that  happened,  how  you  were  selected,  or  as  best  you  know  about 
that. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  was  on  a  sabbatical  leave  in  Zurich  in  1959,  and  much  of 
the  search  for  the  dean  was  going  on  during  that  period.   Bob 
Saunders  was  acting  chair  while  I  was  gone,  and  I  returned 
expecting  to  hold  the  position  of  chair  of  electrical 
engineering  for  another  year  or  so.   By  that  time,  it  was  a 
department . 

Lage:      It  was  converted  to  a  department  before  you  became  dean? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   It  became  a  department  in  1958.   So  I  returned  as  chair  of 
the  department,  and  in  not  too  long- -a  month  or  so — Glenn 
Seaborg  called  me  in  and  asked  me  to  take  on  the  position  as 
dean  for  a  limited  period.  Two  to  three  years  is  the  way  he 
defined  it.   He  didn't  want  it  to  be  acting,  and  he  asked  that  I 
not  tell  people  that  it  was  a  limited  appointment.   I  was  smart 
enough  to  get  it  in  writing.   [laughs] 

Lage:      Now,  when  you  say  "I  was  smart  enough  to  get  it  in  writing," 
explain  what  you  mean  by  that. 

Whinnery:   Well,  Seaborg  left  to  become  chairman  of  AEC  [Atomic  Energy 
Commission],  and  Strong  became  chancellor.   He  was  somewhat 


101 


taken  aback  that  he  had  to  worry  about  getting  a  new  dean  again, 
but  he  did  respect  the  original  agreement. 

Lage:      Would  you  have  taken  the  deanship  if  it  had  been  a  normal 
appointment  and  not  limited? 

Whinnery:   That's  an  interesting  question.   I  don't  know  that  I've  been 
able  to  answer  it  myself.   After  it  was  known  that  this  was  a 
limited  appointment,  some  people  said,  "Weren't  you  very  hurt  by 
this?"   I  said,  "No,  actually  it  was  a  tremendous  advantage," 
because  I  could  have  it  either  way.   I  knew  if  I  did  a  good  job 
and  wanted  to  stay,  there  would  probably  be  no  problem  in 
continuing.   And  on  the  other  hand,  if  I  didn't,  so  many  of  the 
administrative  positions  around  here  are  considered  as  rotating, 
there  would  be  no  problem  in  leaving.   At  least  then  the 
conditions  under  which  I  had  accepted  it  would  be  clear. 

Lage:      So  it  was  sort  of  an  interim  position,  but  not  an  acting 
position?   Seaborg  wanted  you  to  have  full  authority? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   He  preferred  that  it  not  be  widely  known  that  it  was  a 

limited  period,  because  he  wanted  me  to  have  the  full  authority 
of  the  position. 

Lage:      Otherwise,  you'd  be  a  lame  duck  when  you  first  came  in? 
Whinnery:   That's  right. 

Lage:      Did  he  convey  to  you  what  his  concerns  were,  or  what  he  wanted 
you  to  do? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   He  said  he  wanted  the  college  to  become  more  scientific, 
which  I  didn't  argue  with  too  much,  but  I  believed  that  many 
people  on  the  other  side  of  the  campus  didn't  realize  how  much 
advance  there  had  been  in  that  direction.   There  still  was  a 
widespread  opinion  that,  since  O'Brien  talked  so  much  about 
engineering  as  different  from  science,  he  was  negative  about 
science,  which  was  not  the  case  at  all.   I  felt  that  there  was 
an  opportunity  to  show  what  the  college  had  accomplished. 

Lage:      And  actually  continue  the  direction  that  you  had  been  headed  in? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  don't  think  there  was  any  marked  change.   So  my  guess  is 
that,  since  Seaborg  was  relatively  new  to  the  chancellorship,  he 
set  the  limited  time  so  that  he  could  have  a  chance  to  review 
everything  himself  and  see  where  we  were  going.   I  don't  know 
what  the  search  committee ' s  report  was .   There  were  two  very 
strong  candidates.   I  expected  one  of  them  to  be  asked  as  dean, 
and  maybe  they  were  and  turned  it  down:   Earl  Parker  and  Banner 


102 

Davis,  who  were  both  very  distinguished  persons  who  had  done  a 
lot  for  the  college. 

Lage:      Which  sections  did  they  come  out  of? 

Whinnery:   Banner  Davis  was  civil  engineering,  and  Earl  Parker  was 
materials  science. 

Lage:      Did  they  both  have  a  scientific  bent? 

Whinnery:   Parker  certainly  did.   Banner  was  a  very  sound  engineer,  and  as 
head  of  the  Institute  of  Transportation  and  Traffic  Engineering, 
had  built  that  entity  into  a  very  distinguished  unit.   Be  had 
been  chairman  of  civil  engineering  and  had  held  numerous  jobs  on 
the  campus . 

Lage:      So  he  had  a  lot  of  administrative  experience. 
Whinnery:   That's  right.   They  were  both  very  fine  persons. 

Lage:      I  guess  it  would  be  hard  to  find  somebody  from  such  a  big  and 
diverse  group  of  people  who  could  unify  the  whole  college. 

Whinnery:   Of  course,  that's  what  search  committees  are  for,  and  they  don't 
always  agree.   Maybe  this  one  didn't  either.   I  probably  could 
have  found  out  more  about  its  report,  but  there  didn't  seem  to 
be  any  reason  to  do  so. 

Lage:      Did  Seaborg  give  any  more  direction? 
Whinnery:   No,  that  was  about  it. 

Lage:      It's  a  very  general  sort  of  charge,  and  then  you're  left  to  work 
it  out. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  but  as  we  discussed,  no  major  change  in  direction  was 
necessary. 


Improving  Relations  with  Other  Colleges 


Lage:      What  did  you  see  as  your  task? 

Whinnery:   Well,  as  I've  indicated  before,  the  building  of  the  college  had 
really  occurred  to  a  marked  degree,  but  it  was  not  fully 
appreciated.   There  were  also  some  sore  points  with  relation  to 
O'Brien's  style,  which  some  people  saw  as  too  autocratic.   So 


103 


much  of  what  I  saw  was  a  need  for  smoothing  things  out  within 
the  college  itself,  and  making  known  across  the  campus  a  bit 
more  about  what  we  were. 

Lage:      That  hasn't  been  brought  out  too  much,  the  task  of  public 
relations  on  campus. 

Whinnery:   I  think  it  was  an  important  one.   Of  course,  it  was  tremendously 
helped  by  the  time  our  ratings  came  out,  but  that  was  after  I 
left.   I  think  there  had  been  some  improvement  in  our  relations 
with  the  other  colleges. 

Lage:      How  do  you  go  about  improving  the  relations?  Can  you  recall 
specific  things  that  you  did  along  those  lines? 

Whinnery:   Well,  first  of  all,  I  talked  to  other  deans.   I  found  Lincoln 
Constance  extremely  helpful,  and  also  Ken  [Kenneth  S.]  Pitzer, 
who  was  dean  of  chemistry.   And  also,  working  with  senate 
committees. 

Lage:      Lincoln  Constance  was  dean  of  L  &  S  [College  of  Letters  and 
Science]  at  that  time? 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   Well,  he  was  at  the  beginning,  and  then  Walter 
Knight  was,  I  believe. 

Lage:  Oh,  I  see,  so  there  was  a  transition.  I  always  think  of  Lincoln 
Constance  as  being  a  little  aloof  from  the  professional  schools. 
Did  you  find  that  at  all? 

Whinnery:   No,  I  found  him  very  helpful  in  giving  advice  and  cooperating. 

Walter  Knight  and  I  had  one  disagreement  which  we  smoothed  over. 
I  don't  know  whether  this  is  the  time  to  talk  about  it  or  not, 
but  it  was  over  the  policy  of  our  college  for  students  who  were 
subject  to  dismissal  for  scholarship  reasons.  Our  policy  was  to 
give  them  a  period  to  try  anything  they  wanted  to  see  if  they 
could  bring  up  their  grades.   This  was  because  the  College  of 
Letters  and  Science  would  not  talk  to  them  if  they  were  below 
the  C  average . 

Lage:      You  would  allow  them  to  transfer  to  letters  and  science? 

Whinnery:   They  remained  in  engineering  but  could  have  a  period  to  see  if 
they  had  aptitudes  in  other  directions.   Some  of  them  may  not 
have  belonged  in  the  university,  but  others  were  just  in  the 
wrong  field. 

Well,  the  assistant  and  associate  deans  of  our  college 
began  to  call  this  the  L  &  S  program,  which  was  certainly 


104 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 


incorrect,  and  Walter  Knight  wrote  me,  explaining  that  they  were 
very  proud  of  their  program,  and  they  didn't  want  other  people 
calling  something  L  &  S  which  they  hadn't  reviewed.   And  he  was 
perfectly  right  in  this. 

But  I  explained  the  reason  for  our  policy  that  L  &  S 
wouldn't  consider  the  students  as  long  as  they  had  a  deficiency 
of  grade  points.   So  he  made  sure  that  at  least  someone  would 
discuss  the  conditions  for  transfer  with  them.   So  I  think  we 
worked  that  one  out. 

Seems  like  you  had  a  good  solution  to  it,  beneficial  to  the 
students. 

I  don't  know  whether  that  policy  still  goes  on  or  not,  but  it 
was  an  attempt  to  give  the  persons  a  chance  to  see  if  they  had 
aptitudes  in  other  directions  before  dismissing  them  from  the 
university. 


Organization  of  the  College 


Mechanical  Engineering 


Lage:      What  about  the  organizational  issues  within  the  college  that  you 
referred  to  in  the  list  you  gave  me? 

Whinnery:   The  main  problem  at  first  was  with  mechanical  engineering.   Part 
of  it  was  organizational,  and  part  in  determining  the  direction 
in  which  they  should  move.   I  found  that  mechanical  engineering 
was  having  difficulties  after  the  war  in  many  schools,  including 
MIT.   I  talked  with  Gordon  Brown  about  the  problems  there. 

Lage:      The  same  kinds  of  problems? 

Whinnery:   Problems  of  direction.   Unlike  electrical  engineering,  which 
moved  into  new  fields  and  kept  them  in  the  department, 
mechanical  engineering  had  separated  out  many  new  fields- 
nuclear  engineering,  which  had  started  in  mechanical 
engineering,  industrial  engineering  some  years  before,  naval 
architecture  here,  and  in  some  places—fortunately  not  here- 
aeronautical  engineering. 

Lage:      So  they  spun  out  into  different  divisions,  and  then  you're  left 
with  the  older  core  that  might  not  be  as  modern.   Was  that  the 
problem? 


105 


Whinnery:   Yes.   What  direction  should  they  take  next. 

Then  a  second  problem  was  the  argument  between  the 
scientific  approach  and  the  design  approach.   This  was  the 
strongest  in  mechanical  engineering,  where  there  were  very 
capable  design  people  and  very  strong  theoretical  people.   Civil 
engineering  also  has  a  strong  tradition  of  practice  along  with  a 
very  sound  research  aspect,  but  I  found  civil  engineering  the 
easiest  department  to  work  with. 

Lage:      So  they  sort  of  brought  the  two  together  with  more  ease. 

Whinnery:   It  seemed  so.   But  in  mechanical  engineering  there  was  much 
argument  about  it. 

Matters  came  to  a  head  when  I  didn't  handle  the  survey  for 
the  chairpersons  quite  properly.   Mechanical  engineering  had 
three  divisions  at  that  point.   The  instructions  to  survey 
faculty  for  a  department  chair  seemed  unclear  about  a  department 
with  divisions.   So  I  consulted  the  chancellor's  office,  and  it 
was  suggested  that  the  survey  of  individual  faculty  should  be  at 
the  division  level.   Then  I  should  talk  with  the  division  chairs 
concerning  the  department  chair,  who  is  the  one  that  they  worked 
with. 

Lage:      Let  me  just  interrupt  your  flow  to  ask:   how  often  did  you  have 
to  appoint  the  division  chairs?  When  the  new  dean  comes  in, 
does  everything  change? 

Whinnery:   No.  Appointments  are  typically  three  to  five  years.  The  first 
one  that  came  up  was  in  the  aerosciences  division  of  mechanical 
engineering.  And  that's  when  I  asked  for  the  ruling  on  how  it 
should  be  done.   Of  course,  it  would  have  made  good  sense  to 
survey  all  faculty  for  both  division  and  department  chairs,  and 
that  was  done  in  all  later  cases . 

Lage:      But  instead,  the  survey  was  for  the  division  head,  and  then-- 

Whinnery:   When  [Clyne  F.]  Garland  asked  to  be  relieved  as  department 

chair,  I  talked  with  the  division  chairs  and  a  few  other  people 
but  did  not  survey  the  entire  mechanical  engineering  faculty. 
At  that  time  the  procedure  seemed  reasonable  because  the  main 
job  of  the  department  chair  had  been  as  a  coordinator  among  the 
division  chairs.   It  became  obvious  from  the  discussions  that  no 
one  person  would  be  acceptable  to  all  because  of  the  differences 
of  opinion  concerning  the  emphasis  to  be  placed  on  design.   I 
decided  to  recommend  Sam  [Samuel  A.]  Schaaf,  who  seemed  to  me  to 
be  doing  a  good  job  as  chair  of  the  Aeronautical  Sciences 
Division,  and  he  was  appointed  by  the  chancellor.   A  number  of 


106 

faculty  were  disturbed  by  the  appointment,  and  by  the  procedure, 
and  wrote  to  the  chancellor  asking  that  it  be  done  over. 

Lage:      Was  Sam  Schaaf  representing  the  research  side  of  the  division? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  I  suppose  he  was.   His  degree  was  in  mathematics,  not 

mechanical  engineering,  and  that  bothered  some  people.   But  he 
had  been  working  with  the  aero  group  very  successfully.   I  think 
it  worked  out  in  the  end.   After  talking  with  Seaborg,  Seaborg 
decided  not  to  ask  him  to  step  down,  but  let  him  see  if  it 
worked.   Schaaf  chose  to  have  the  department  concentrate  on  the 
undergraduate  curriculum,  and  had  a  series  of  faculty  meetings. 
Although  there  remained  differences  of  opinion,  there  seemed  to 
be  a  sense  of  unity  to  the  department.   But  it  was  pretty 
traumatic  for  a  while. 

Lage:      When  you  say  it  was  traumatic,  did  you  get  a  lot  of  personal 
response  from  people? 

Whinnery:   Some.   But  I  felt  especially  badly  because  I  hadn't  handled  it 
properly. 

Lage:      Were  you  involved  subsequently  with  mechanical  engineering  in 
working  out  the  balance  there? 

Whinnery:   They  pretty  much  handled  it  internally,  and  from  my  position, 
matters  went  quite  smoothly  from  then  on. 

Lage:      Would  the  direction  they  took  have  been  sort  of  a  compromise,  or 
did  they  head  off  in  the  more  theoretical  direction? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  think  it  was  more  theoretical  than  before.   There  were 
very  good  people  who  began  to  develop  the  new  postwar 
directions,  and  they  were  able  to  attract  some  outstanding  young 
faculty,  including  a  young  assistant  professor,  Chang-Lin  Tien 
[who  became  Berkeley's  chancellor  in  1990]. 


Communication  within  the  College  and  Beyond 


Lage:      Were  the  department  heads  then  part  of  an  advisory  group  to  you 
as  dean? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  the  Dean's  Coordinating  Advisory  Council. 
Lage:      How  did  you  use  that  group? 


107 


Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Mostly  for  information  exchange.   There  were  meetings  at  the 
chancellor's  level  and  various  campus  levels,  trying  to  keep 
everyone  informed.   Looking  back  on  it,  we  probably  took  way  too 
much  time.   But  I  thought  communication  extremely  important.   In 
addition  to  the  meetings,  I  wrote  notes,  I  think  about  twice  a 
year,  concerning  major  issues  going  on  both  in  this  campus  and 
other  campuses  about  engineering. 

Who  were  those  written  for? 
The  college  faculty. 
Oh,  I  see,  to  circulate. 

Yes.   Paul  Morton  had  started  for  the  division  of  electrical 
engineering  division  notes,  and  I  carried  this  on  in  the 
department.   But  it  was  interesting  that  Fred  Terman  of 
Stanford,  who  often  was  very  critical  of  Berkeley  engineering, 
was  nice  enough  to  visit  me  after  I  became  dean  and  gave  me  two 
pieces  of  advice.   One  was  to  communicate  with  the  faculty 
through  some  sort  of  a  bulletin.   Since  I  had  done  this  in 
electrical  engineering,  that  was  natural.   And  the  other  was, 
don't  take  your  problems  to  bed  with  you. 


[laughs]   Good  advice. 

But  some  nights,  I  would  lay  awake  wondering  how. 
tell  me  how  he  did  it ! 


He  didn't 


Did  your  poetry  come  in  handy  with  that,  kind  of  letting  go  of 
things? 

[laughs]   I  don't  think  it  was  a  highly  productive  poetic 
period. 

You  say  you  also  communicated  a  lot  with  the  chancellor's 
office. 

Oh,  yes.  The  chancellor's  office  had  formal  meetings  with 
advisory  councils  on  both  administrative  and  academic  matters. 
And  certainly  both  chancellors  were  approachable  whenever  I 
wanted  to  talk  to  them  on  an  individual  basis. 

Were  those  meetings  of  the  chancellor's  groups  primarily  for  you 
to  advise  the  chancellor  on  campus-wide  issues,  or  for  him  to 
inform  you? 

Both.  The  chancellor  would  describe  policy  matters  that  would 
affect  the  university,  and  quite  often  would  ask  for  advice. 


108 


For  instance,  at  that  time  was  when  there  was  a  possibility  of 
moving  into  the  California  School  for  the  Deaf  and  Blind. 

Lage:      Way  back  then? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Should  we  do  it,  and  what  were  the  alternatives  if  one 

wanted  to  expand  to  a  satellite  campus.   So  he  would  ask  advice 
on  matters  such  as  that. 

Lage:      Were  there  other  committees  that  that  group  spun  off?  Did  you 
actually  get  involved  in  working  committees? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  remember  any  directly  from  that  group.   There  certainly 
were  other  committees  going  on. 

Lage:      Were  there  differences  in  Strong's  and  Seaborg's  style  that  you 
observed? 

Whinnery:   No  radical  difference  in  policy.   They  were  different  people 

certainly,  but  both  were  thoughtful  and  quiet  people,  and  good 
listeners.   I  think  there  was  perhaps  more  of  a  contrast  with 
Kerr's  style.   Of  course,  I'm  remembering  Kerr  from  when  I  was  a 
department  chair. 

Lage:      Elaborate  a  bit  more  about  the  contrast  with  Kerr's  style.   How 
was  that  different? 

Whinnery:   [laughs]   I'm  trying  to  think  how  much  it  was  personality  and 
how  much  it  was  really  a  difference  in  content.   I  have  the 
feeling  that  we  got  deeper  into  problems  with  Kerr  than  we 
perhaps  did  with  Strong,  and  explored  them  in  more  depth.   But 
it  may  be  that  these  were  early  parts  of  Seaborg's  and  Strong's 
administrations,  so  that  comparing  a  person  who  had  been  in  for 
ten  years  or  so  with  someone  who  was  just  starting  is  unfair. 

Lage:      Because  you  were  in  connection  with  Strong  just  for  two  years, 
and  Seaborg  was  only  here  for  two  or  three  years  as  chancellor. 

Whinnery:   Something  like  that. 


Small  Departments;   Naval  Architecture  and  Materials  Science 


Lage:      Okay,  let's  see  what  else  we  have  on  the  list.   You  mentioned 

the  problem  of  small  departments.   Some  of  these  spin-offs  from 
mechanical  engineering  became  small  departments? 


109 


Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Yes.   The  smallest,  but  actually  one  that  worked  very  well,  was 
then  called  naval  architecture.   Now  it's  naval  architecture  and 
offshore  engineering.   It  was  then  a  three-man  department. 

That  is  small! 

And  everybody  that  came  in  to  give  advice  would  say,  "Well,  that 
ought  to  be  combined  with  either  mechanical  engineering  or 
civil."   Its  faculty  had  relations  with  both.   But  it  was  a 
distinguished  department  and  ran  very  smoothly.   They'd  trade 
off  the  chair  position  pretty  regularly. 

They  all  got  along? 


They  all  got  along  fine. 

Were  they  theoretically  oriented? 
practical  field. 


It  sounds  like  such  a 


Both,  but  [John  V.]  Wehausen  in  particular  was  a  very  strong 
hydrodynamic  theorist. 

So  there  weren't  necessarily  problems  with  small  departments. 

Not  necessarily,  no.   But  one  of  the  problems  was  materials 
science,  which  was  a  very,  very  distinguished  group.   There  were 
two  issues  there.  One  was  that  they  had  a  hard  time  getting 
many  undergraduates  interested  in  the  program  for  a  while.   One 
of  the  things  they  did,  somewhat  later,  was  to  start  joint 
programs,  so  students  could  have  a  combined  major  of,  say, 
electrical  engineering  and  materials  science.   There  are  a 
number  of  these  joint  majors  now.   Nuclear  engineering  has  done 
much  the  same  thing. 

But  the  other  problem  was  that  the  department  had  in  it  the 
mining-oriented  people  and  material-oriented  people.  There  were 
inevitable  differences  of  opinion  in  that  respect. 

Do  they  relate  very  closely? 

Some  did  and  some  didn't.   But  there  were  some  strong 
differences  of  opinion  between  the  two  sides  on  many  issues. 

Would  they  be  differing  on  things  like  designing  a  curriculum, 
or  monetary  support,  or  what? 

Most  everything  a  department  has  to  work  together  on. 


110 

Lage:      That  must  be  very  hard.   Did  you  have  a  tendency  to  encourage 

unity,  or  to  think  that  maybe  the  two  should  have  been  spun  off? 

Whinnery:   Well,  because  of  the  small  undergraduate  program  it  was 

relatively  small  already.  Maybe  it  would  have  been  better  to 
divide  it,  I  don't  know.  But  there  are  arguments  for  areas  of 
interrelationship  between  the  two  subjects. 

Lage:      Educationally? 
Whinnery:   Educationally,  yes. 

Lage:      How  did  you  deal  with  things  like  that?  Were  you  called  in  to 
sort  of  smooth  the  waters? 

Whinnery:   I  mostly  talked,  of  course,  with  the  chairpersons  of  either  the 
departments  or  divisions,  and  tried  not  to  do  anything  that 
would  undermine  their  positions.   Often  we  would  talk  to  people 
together,  or  get  a  group  together  to  discuss  where  to  go  from 
there. 

Lage:      It  sounds  like  you  had  a  very  collaborative  style. 
Whinnery:   Yes,  I  think  so. 
Lage:      In  contrast  to  O'Brien? 
it 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  think  that  O'Brien  certainly  had  a  collaborative  style 
too,  but  I  think  that  I  did  a  bit  more. 

Lage:      It  seems  like  it  was  called  for  at  that  particular  point  in 
time. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  I  think  so. 

Lage:      You  must  have  felt  you  were  sitting  on  top  of  a  tremendously 
diverse  organization. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 


Personnel  in  the  College  of  Engineering 


Whinnery:   Somewhere  along  the  line  I  want  to  say  that  I  was  very  honored 
to  have  this  position,  because  by  that  time  the  college  was 


Ill 


highly  respected  all  over  the  country.   It  was  an  opening  to  a 
lot  of  things  nationwide  that  I  got  into,  by  virtue  of  this. 
But  the  other  part  was  internally,  I  got  to  appreciate  how  good 
the  various  departments  were,  and  how  many  excellent  people  we 
had.   I  think  before  I  finished  I  knew  most  of  them  on  a  first- 
name  basis.   There  were  two  hundred  and  some  faculty,  and  there 
may  have  been  a  few  that  I  didn't  know  well.   I  think  I  still 
knew  their  first  names,  but  may  not  have  been  on  much  more  than 
a  hello  basis.   But  usually,  I  had  had  discussions  with  nearly 
everyone  on  some  issue. 

Lage:      Well,  that's  gratifying.   Had  the  departments  already  been  in 
place  long  enough  that  there  wasn't  too  much  transition?  I 
would  think  just  having  the  departments  in  existence  and 
handling  their  own  budgets  would  have  been  an  administrative 
challenge.   Did  you  have  to  oversee  that? 

Whinnery:   The  budget  certainly  had  to  go  through  the  dean's  office.   Here, 
I  want  to  talk  about  the  staff  that  I  worked  with.   Frances 
Eberhart,  who  was  Woertendyke  before  she  married  Howard 
Eberhart,  was  tremendously  helpful. 

Lage:      And  she  was  the  administrative  assistant? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  at  the  highest  level.   She  had  handled  things  for  O'Brien, 
and  in  fact,  at  that  time  a  lot  of  people  called  her  Dean 
Woertendyke.   [laughter]   She  gave  tremendous  help  and 
understood  the  university  system  thoroughly.   In  fact,  Clark 
Kerr  has  referred  to  her  very  often  as  one  of  the  most  competent 
persons  that  he  had  to  work  with.   She  was  especially  helpful 
with  the  budget. 

Lage:      In  what  way?  What  would  be  her  responsibility? 

Whinnery:   She  collected  the  data  and  the  proposals  from  the  various 

departments.   All  of  the  background  material  would  be  compared 
with  that  from  previous  years,  what  we'd  requested  and  what  had 
been  turned  down,  what  arguments  we'd  given,  and  what  we  might 
do  differently  if  we  wanted  to  go  after  something  again.   She 
worked  with  the  department  chairpersons,  helping  them  make  the 
best  possible  case  for  their  requests. 

Lage:      Sounds  like  a  good  person  to  have  at  your  right  hand. 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   I  don't  know  what  would  have  happened  if  she  had  left 
and  I'd  had  to  start  with  somebody  new. 

And  then  another  essential  person  was  Don  Horning  [lecturer 
and  research  engineer],  who  administered  the  facilities, 


112 


including  the  Richmond  Field  Station  and  the  planning  of 
buildings .   The  main  new  building  that  was  being  planned  during 
that  period  was  Etcheverry. 

Lage:      What  was  his  background? 

Whinnery:   He  had  an  engineering  degree,  and  had  worked  with  O'Brien  for 
many  years.  On  all  of  the  building  projects,  he  worked  with 
Louis  DeMonte  of  the  office  of  architects  and  engineers  on  the 
campus.  There  were  also  minor  capital  improvements  on  existing 
buildings  and  always  plenty  to  do  in  maintaining  and  improving 
the  Richmond  Field  Station. 


Construction  of  New  Buildings 


Lage:      Davis  Hall  was  also  being  built,  wasn't  it? 

Whinnery:   No,  that  was  somewhat  later.   Initial  planning  began  when  I  was 
dean. 

Lage:      What  about  the  approval  process  for  it?  Was  it  on  the  books 
when  you  came  in? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  think  so.   Do  you  want  to  talk  about  the  buildings  now? 
Lage:      Yes,  let's  do  that. 

Whinnery:   Let's  start  with  Etcheverry  [Hall].   I  think  it  was  about  the 
week  after  I  became  dean  when  I  was  called  in  to  a  meeting  on 
the  final  plans  for  Etcheverry.   The  architects  were  Skidmore, 
Owings  &  Merrill.   They  had  designed  a  very  lovely  building  with 
multiple  levels,  terraces  and  so  on. 

Well,  the  first  thing  I  found  was  that  the  faculty  was  not 
too  happy  with  it  functionally.  They  thought  that  it  spread 
things  out  too  much.   But  after  much  discussion,  we  decided  to 
go  ahead  with  it.   It  was  approved  by  the  university  but  was 
turned  down  in  Sacramento  as  looking  too  fancy.   The  architects 
said  that  they  had  saved  money  by  saving  on  excavation  costs 
with  this  multiple-level  design.   But  the  answer  came  back  which 
I  always  paraphrase  as  saying,  "Our  buildings  don't  gotta  be 
cheap,  they  just  gotta  look  cheap." 

Lage:      [laughs]   That's  why  we  have  Barrows  Hall. 


113 


Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Yes.   Anyway, 
has  now. 


they  redesigned  Etcheverry  into  the  basic  form  it 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 


Did  they  redesign  the  interior  too? 

Oh,  yes,  they  had  to,  because  of  the  different  layouts  of  the 
terrace-type  levels.   And  I  don't  know  whether  it  was  a  good 
idea  or  not.   If  the  faculty  had  not  been  somewhat  negative 
concerning  the  functionality  of  the  building,  I  would  have 
fought  harder  for  the  original  design,  but  I  decided  to  accept 
the  revision.   But  I've  often  thought  that  it  might  have  been 
better  to  have  had  the  original  design.   It  certainly  would  have 
been  prettier. 

Did  the  faculty  get  to  feed  into  the  layout  on  the  second  go- 
around? 

Oh,  yes,  a  tremendous  amount  of  work  goes  into  designing  a 
building.   Everybody  that's  going  to  be  in  the  building  has  to 
look  at  the  space  that  they'll  be  concerned  with,  and  then  there 
has  to  be  concern  about  the  interrelationship  among  spaces. 

That  must  be  quite  a  process  on  its  own. 

It  is.   But  again,  Don  Horning  was  tremendously  helpful  in 
handling  that,  and  of  course,  Louis  DeMonte  of  the  office  of 
architects  and  engineers. 

On  Davis  Hall,  T.  Y.  [Tung-Yen]  Lin  was  then  the  chair  of 
the  structural  division  in  civil  engineering.   The  building  that 
was  planned  for  civil  engineering  was  to  be  on  the  site  of  the 
naval  architecture  buildings,  the  wooden  buildings  on  the  north 
side  of  the  campus.   It  looked  like  it  would  be  seven  years  or 
so  before  it  could  be  funded.   T.  Y.  discovered  that  additions 
to  buildings  took  priority  over  new  buildings.   Although  it 
sounded  silly  to  add  a  huge  building  onto  a  small  one,  we  did 
decide  to  propose  the  addition- -what  is  now  Davis  Hall--to  the 
small  Engineering  Materials  Lab.   And  it  was  approved. 

In  thinking  back  on  it,  it  may  have  been  a  mistake.   If 
they  had  waited  for  the  original  site,  they  could  have  designed 
the  building  without  the  compromises  they  had  to  make  to  attach 
it  to  EML.   I  understand  that  there  have  been  some  difficulties 
with  the  facilities  and  the  interconnections,  too. 

Although  at  this  time  I  can't  imagine  them  tearing  down  the 
naval  architecture  buildings. 


114 


Whinnery:   I  think  at  that  stage  it  would  not  have  caused  much  of  a 

problem.   When  Dean  [Ernest  S.]  Kuh  proposed  that  site  for  the 
Bechtel  Center,  there  was  an  outcry  that  they  were  national 
landmarks.   But  there  was  a  different  climate  at  that  time. 
They  were,  as  I  understand  it,  not  even  recorded  in  the  [John 
Galen]  Howard  notebooks,  since  he  thought  of  them  as  temporary 
buildings . 

Lage:      Anything  else  about  Davis  Hall?   Is  it  named  after  Banner  Davis? 

Whinnery:   No,  after  Raymond  E.  Davis,  who  was  a  very  distinguished  civil 
engineer.   Civil  engineering  was  probably  the  best -known  of  the 
departments  around  the  world  at  the  period  before  O'Brien.   R. 
E.  Davis  and  colleagues  had  done  important  work  in  studying 
concrete. 

Lage:      Is  the  choice  of  name  suggested  by  the  department,  or  the 
college? 

Whinnery:   Now  it's  suggested  by  giving  money.   But  at  that  time  most 

buildings  were  named  after  famous  campus  figures.   Anyone  can 
make  suggestions  and  there  is  a  campus  committee  that  makes 
recommendations  to  the  administration.   We  tried  to  get 
Etcheverry  named  O'Brien  Hall,  but  it  was  not  approved.   I  think 
quite  frankly  it  was  because  some  people  were  not  too  happy  with 
Mike  O'Brien.   Anyway,  his  name  was  given  to  the  small  addition 
to  Hesse,  which  originally  had  just  been  called  the  Hesse  annex. 

Lage:      Who  was  Etcheverry? 

Whinnery:   Bernard  A.  Etcheverry.   He  was  a  distinguished  professor  of 

irrigation  engineering  but  had  not  had  the  impact  on  the  whole 
college  that  O'Brien  had  had. 

Lage:      Who  was  Cory? 

Whinnery:   [Clarence  L.]  Cory  was  dean  of  what  was  then  the  College  of 
Mechanics  [1901-1929],  which  was  mechanical  engineering  and 
electrical  engineering  together.   His  picture  and  biography  are 
near  the  entrance  of  Cory  Hall.   It's  especially  interesting  to 
find  that  he  was  appointed  as  an  assistant  professor  at  age 
twenty  and  as  dean  at  age  thirty. 


115 


Richmond  Field  Station 


Lage:      We  haven't  talked  about  the  role  of  the  Richmond  Field  Station. 
How  did  that  operate  and  relate  to  the  rest  of  the  college? 

Whinnery:   This  was  something  that  O'Brien  started  when  he  was  working  with 
Sproul.   His  argument  was  that  there  were  certain  kinds  of 
projects  that  couldn't  possibly  fit  on  the  campus  that  were 
pertinent  to  engineering—sanitary  engineering  was  one,  some  of 
the  large  structural  tests  related  to  earthquake  engineering 
another,  seawater  conversion,  transportation  and  traffic  where 
some  of  the  tests  need  a  test  highway.  The  story  of  how  he  got 
it  is  in  his  oral  history,  so  I  won't  repeat  that.   But  it  was 
working  very  well  for  persons  who  realized  they  couldn't  be 
doing  what  they  were  doing  without  it.   Transportation  and 
traffic  with  Banner  Davis  was  certainly  a  good  example,  and  the 
sanitary  engineering  research  facilities  another.   At  that  time, 
[Percy  H.]  McGauhey  was  in  charge  of  sanitary  engineering,  and 
that  worked  very  well. 

But  there  were  some  people  that  were  put  there  just  to  get 
space,  and  they  were  not  very  happy. 

Lage:      To  be  away  from  the  campus? 
Whinnery:   Yes. 


Operations  Research  Center 


Whinnery:   The  one  that  I  spent  the  most  time  with  was  the  operations 

research  activity  headed  by  George  [B.]  Dantzig.   Ron  [Ronald] 
Shephard  had  encouraged  Dantzig  to  come  here.   Dantzig  was 
certainly  one  of  the  very  brilliant  persons  in  the  field  of 
operations  research,  and  Shephard  had  promoted  the  Operations 
Research  Center  with  Dantzig  as  director. 

Lage:      And  that  was  created  during  your  deanship?   In  '61? 

Whinnery:  Yes.  But  the  only  space  we  could  find  for  it  was  at  Richmond. 
Since  Dantzig  and  colleagues  were  largely  doing  theoretical 
work,  they  were  never  very  happy,  and  it  took  some  while  to  find 
space  on  the  campus  for  them. 

Lage:      Where  did  you  finally  find  it? 


116 


Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


I  started  to  say  it  was  in  Etcheverry,  but  that  wasn't  finished 
at  that  time.   Etcheverry  is  where  it  eventually  ended  up.   I 
don't  remember  the  exact  location  before  that  but  it  was 
compromise  space,  and  Dantzig  finally  left  the  university  to  go 
to  Stanford.   I've  often  wondered  whether  it  was  because  he 
didn't  feel  that  he  was  given  the  facilities  that  he  should  have 
had. 


Did  this  Operations  Research  Center  create  a  new  program? 
was  the  thinking  behind  that? 


What 


Yes.   Operations  Research  grew  out  of  World  War  II.   It  was  an 
analytical  method  for  handling  complicated  operations.   In  World 
War  II,  it  had  been  applied  to  military  operations.   Dantzig  was 
certainly  one  of  the  pioneers;  Shephard  was  another,  in  showing 
that  it  could  be  applied  to  any  large-scale  operation- 
industrial,  international,  or  government.   They  did  some  very 
brilliant  work. 

It  sounds  like  a  really  interesting  field. 

Yes. 

Did  you  help  set  up  that  center? 

I  had  to  help  with  the  administrative  work  and  the  arguments, 
but  Ron  Shephard  was  the  person  that  supplied  the  expertise. 

That  has  to  go  on  up  through  the  university  administration? 

Sure.   A  center  is  an  organized  research  unit  and  I  believe 
requires  approval  up  to  the  regents  level. 

Anything  else  about  the  various  institutes,  your  relationship 
with  traffic  and  transportation  studies,  and  sanitary 
engineering? 

Both  of  those  had  very  good  directors,  Banner  Davis  with  ITTE 
[Institute  for  Traffic  and  Transportation  Engineering],  and 
McGauhey  with  SERL,  Sanitary  Engineering  Research  Lab.   I 
visited  them  quite  often.   Banner  Davis  had  conferences  every 
year  with  the  traffic  people  of  the  state.   One  of  the  good 
things  about  it  was  that  not  only  did  it  do  original  research 
work,  but  worked  with  transportation  people  throughout  the  state 
and  had  a  tremendous  amount  of  support.   So  I  went  to  those 
meetings,  but  largely  as  an  observer. 


Lage: 


Ran  themselves. 


Whinnery : 
Lage: 


117 


Yes. 


Well,  that's  gratifying,  something  doing  so  much  good  work  that 
you  didn't  have  to  troubleshoot. 


Whinnery:   Yes. 


Faculty  Recruitment 


Lage:      We  haven't  talked  at  all  about  faculty  recruitment.  What  does 
the  dean  do  there?   Somewhere  I  ran  across  the  figure  that  you 
had  twenty-three  positions  to  fill  when  you  came  in.   Could  that 
be  right? 

Whinnery:   Not  when  I  came  in,  no,  certainly  not.   That  might  have  been  the 
cumulative  total  over  the  period.   But  the  initiation  is  really 
at  the  department  level.   One  of  the  reasons,  of  course,  that 
O'Brien  wanted  to  be  head  of  the  department  of  engineering  as 
well  as  dean  of  the  college  is  that  even  though  much  of  the 
initiative  came  from  the  then-divisions,  he  had  the  right  to 
appoint  people—or  to  initiate  the  process. 

Lage:      But  in  your  case--? 

Whinnery:   But  in  my  case,  I  reviewed  the  department  requests,  although 

quite  often  there  would  be  discussion  ahead  of  time  before  the 
case  was  presented  formally. 

Lage:      Would  you  have  a  role  in  trying  to  get  a  key  person  to  come 
here? 

Whinnery:   Sometimes.   I  recall  discussions  with  Hans  [P.]  Mark,  who  was 
being  recruited  by  nuclear  engineering,  and  George  [L.]  Turin 
for  electrical  engineering.   There  might  be  questions  on 
facilities,  but  the  main  purpose  was  to  convince  them  that  they 
would  have  support  at  higher  levels.   Our  Chancellor  [Chang-Lin] 
Tien  likes  to  say  that  I  hired  him,  because  I  was  dean  when  he 
was  hired,  but  I  think  that  was  such  a  strong  case  when  the 
department  presented  it  that  I  didn't  do  much  other  than 
enthusiastically  support  it. 

Lage:      Just  the  mention  of  Chancellor  Tien  reminds  me:   this  is  totally 
off  the  subject,  but  I  just  want  your  reaction.   At  the  campus- 
wide  open  house  last  spring,  the  Oral  History  Office  had  a 
little  recording  station  for  people  to  come  in  and  record  five 
minutes  of  their  experiences  at  Berkeley  or  with  Berkeley.   And 


118 


of  course,  the  chancellor  was  the  first  one.   He  told  about 
coming  here  and  not  being  able  to  find  housing  because  he  was 
Chinese.   He  was  looking  for  a  place  on  the  north  side  [where 
more  faculty  and  graduate  students  live].   I  forget  where  he 
ended  up,  someplace  on  the  south  side  [where  more  undergraduates 
live].   Would  that  be  something  that  would  ever  be  brought  to 
your  attention,  or  that  you  were  aware  of? 

Whinnery:   I  learned  later  that  Ernie  Kuh  had  a  problem  when  he  was  married 
and  looking  for  a  place  in  north  Berkeley.   He  did  find  a  nice 
place  in  Kensington.   I  wasn't  aware  of  the  problem  at  the  time. 

Lage:      It  wasn't  something  discussed;  probably  Tien  didn't  discuss  it 
either  at  the  time.   But  it  just  was  kind  of  shocking  to  me. 
That  was  only  '59,  I  believe.   I  just  wondered  if  that  kind  of 
personal  problem  that  faculty  might  run  into  would  ever  come  to 
the  attention  of  a  chairperson. 

Whinnery:   It  certainly  would  be  appropriate  to  bring  such  problems  to  the 
attention  of  a  chairperson  or  dean.   On  a  related  matter,  we  had 
two  or  three  tragedies  with  students,  including  a  suicide  from 
the  Campanile  [campus  bell  tower]. 

Lage:      That  was  an  engineering  student? 

Whinnery:   An  engineering  student.   There  were  also  some  difficult  personal 
problems  with  one  of  the  faculty  members,  a  couple  with  research 
personnel,  and  one  with  a  staff  member.   I'd  rather  not  go  into 
details. 


Women  and  Minorities 


Lage:      Was  there  talk  in  those  early  times  of  questions  like  we  hear  so 
much  of  today,  women  in  engineering  and  other  minorities? 

Whinnery:   It  was  not  as  much  of  a  formal  issue.  When  I  edited  the  book  on 
The  World  of  Engineering,  I  asked  Irene  Peden,  a  very  fine  woman 
engineer,  to  write  a  chapter  on  women  and  engineering.   So  we 
were  aware  that  women  in  general  did  not  consider  it  a  main-line 
career.   But  those  who  went  into  it  generally  found  it  a  fine 
career. 

Lage:      And  she  found  it  a  very  rewarding  career.   I  remember  reading 
that  book.   Did  you  have — you  must  have  had  some  women. 


119 


Whinnery:   Yes.   We  always  had  some  women.   Even  when  I  was  in  school, 
there  were  two  or  three  in  my  class. 

Lage:      Were  they  treated  with  equality,  do  you  think? 

Whinnery:  Well,  I  don't  know  how  they  felt  about  it,  but  I  didn't  ever  see 
problems.   I'm  sure  when  you're  that  much  of  a  minority,  you 
must  notice  it.   But  there  was  not  anything- - 

Lage:      No  harassment  that  you — 
Whinnery:   That  I  could  see,  no. 

Lage:      How  about  the  Chinese  professors?  Was  that  a  matter  for  comment 
or  consideration  when  you  were  hiring  a  minority  professor? 

Whinnery:   Well,  it  certainly  wasn't  in  our  department.   It  was  not  an 

issue.   But  some  of  the  letters  that  came  in  [laughs]  would  say 
things  like,  "He  has  a  very  good  personality  for  a  Chinese." 

Lage:      These  are  letters  of  support? 
Whinnery:   That  you  solicit  from  outside. 
Lage:      Well,  that's  interesting. 

Whinnery:   And  to  the  credit  of  our  faculty,  they  would  get  furious.   We 
had  one  black  professor  in  electrical  engineering,  Joe  [Joseph 
T.]  Gier,  who  was  very  fine.   He  transferred  to  UCLA  at  the 
encouragement  of  Dean  Boelter,  because  they  had  worked  together 
here.   I  don't  think  he  left  because  of  any  way  he  was  treated 
here. 

Lage:      Well,  good.   I  hadn't  really  anticipated  getting  into  those 

issues,  but  I  think  it's  important.   Because  they  weren't  in  the 
public  eye  at  that  time,  but  the  issue  is  still  there. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  that's  right. 


Recruiting  Mistakes 


Lage:  You  mentioned,  I  think  to  Professor  Susskind  in  the  interview, 
that  there  were  some  mistakes  made  in  faculty  recruiting.  Can 
you  talk  about  them?  You  don't  have  to  mention  names,  but  how 
do  mistakes  get  made,  and  what  kinds  of  mistakes  were  made? 


120 


Whinnery:   That  comment  referred  to  the  period  when  I  was  chair  of 

Electrical  Engineering.   We  had  so  many  positions  all  at  once, 
and  may  not  have  been  as  careful  as  we  could  have  been  in  a 
couple  of  them.   Certainly  we  tried  to  solicit  information  in 
the  usual  way,  and  the  appointments  did  go  through  the  usual 
senate  procedures.   But  I  don't  want  to  make  too  much  of  this. 
1  don't  think  there  was  permanent  damage  to  the  department. 

Lage:      It  doesn't  seem  that  way.  As  dean,  in  considering  faculty 

appointments,  would  you  pretty  much  just  take  the  department's 
paperwork  and  review  it-- 

Whinnery:   O'Brien  had  set  up  a  committee  in  the  college  office  which  so 
far  as  I  know  is  not  required,  and  may  not  be  used  now,  to 
review  all  the  cases  that  came  through.   Anyone  who  thought  that 
O'Brien  was  not  strong  on  the  research  and  the  scientific 
approach  should  look  at  the  people  he  appointed  to  that 
committee.   They  included  Earl  Parker,  Sam  Silver,  and  others 
who  clearly  had  a  strong  research  record.   They  were  to  advise 
both  the  dean  and  the  department  chairs.   Sometimes  the 
appointment  seemed  good  but  the  case  could  be  strengthened. 

So  I  continued  this,  and  it  was  very  helpful.   I  did 
certainly  go  over  the  paperwork,  and  in  many  cases  met  the 
individuals  when  they  were  being  recruited,  as  mentioned 
earlier. 

Lage:      Did  you  ever  turn  down  at  your  level  a  recommendation  of  the 
department? 

Whinnery:   I  certainly  didn't  without  discussing  it.   I  think  we  may  have 
had  discussions  on  some  in  which  we  jointly  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  there  were  better  candidates. 


The  Budget  Committee  of  the  Academic  Senate 


Lage:      Once  you  approved  and  prepared  the  paperwork  and  all  that,  did 
you  have  any  difficulty  getting  the  budget  committee  [Committee 
on  Budget  and  Interdepartmental  Affairs]  to  sign  on  in  the 
Academic  Senate? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  we  had  some  problems.   We  had  more  problems  with  the  budget 
committee  on  promotions  than  we  did  on  initial  appointments,  as 
I  recall.  And  there  were  more  in  the  beginning  of  my  term  than 
later. 


121 


Lage:      What  kinds  of  things  would  they  call  into  question  about 
promotions? 

Whinnery:   Typically  the  research  record,  or  some  of  the  letters  might  seem 
to  them  not  as  strong  as  they  should  be. 

Lage:      Was  this  a  process  you  could  say  was  helpful,  or  did  you  see  it 
as  a  roadblock? 

Whinnery:   Well,  I  was  pretty  aggravated  at  times.   On  the  whole,  I  think 
it  was  helpful.   It  certainly  made  us  very  careful  on  our 
standards.   But  sometimes  it  was  the  length  of  time  that  was  the 
issue.   I  believe  we  lost  some  good  candidates  because  other 
universities  could  move  faster. 

II 

Lage:      Do  you  think  your  problems  with  the  budget  committee  were  a 

result  of  their  not  understanding  the  requirements  of  research 
in  engineering? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  I  think  in  some  of  these  cases,  that  was  correct. 
Lage:      How  did  you  handle  that? 

Whinnery:   Well,  I  would  try  to  explain  the  reasons  for  our 

recommendations.   This  was  part  of  the  process  of  relations  with 
the  other  side  of  the  campus  that  we  discussed  earlier.   I  think 
by  the  time  we  finished  there  was  a  better  understanding.   Part 
of  the  success  came  from  the  good  people  that  we  had  on  the 
budget  committee. 

Lage:      So  you  had  some  representation  from  engineering  there. 
Whinnery:   We  had  some  representation,  and  that  helped. 

Lage:      Did  you  ever  have  to  go  to  the  chancellor  to  plead  a  case,  do 
you  remember? 

Whinnery:   Any  appeal  to  the  budget  committee  had  to  go  through  the 

chancellor,  of  course.  That  was  the  line  of  communication.   So 
we  did,  yes,  I  remember  more  in  the  promotions  than  in  the 
appointments .   But  I  think  there  were  at  least  some  of  the 
appointments  that  were  appealed.   In  some  cases,  it  was  just  a 
need  for  more  information. 

Lage:      Some  mention  is  made,  and  I  think  it  was  again  in  the  Susskind 
interview,  about  recruiting  students  as  being  a  concern. 


122 


Whinnery:   Particularly  at  the  graduate  level,  but  also  at  the 

undergraduate  level.   This  was  the  main  reason  that  O'Brien  put 
in  examinations,  to  try  to  be  sure  that  we  had  students  that 
were  bright  and  also  had  the  capabilities  for  engineering.   But 
the  key  characteristic  of  a  strong  graduate  program  is  not  only 
to  have  a  strong  faculty  but  outstanding  students. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  a  role  in  that  as  dean? 

Whinnery:   We  had  an  associate  dean  for  graduate  matters,  and  one  of  the 

points  of  discussion  in  a  lot  of  our  meetings  was  how  to  improve 
the  quality  of  the  students.  Part  of  it  is  advertising,  part  of 
it  is  selection,  part  of  it  is  financial  support. 

Lage:      A  big  part,  probably. 
Whinnery:   Yes,  certainly. 

Lage:      And  that  you  were  doing  through  these  various  research 
institutes,  in  part? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  that's  right. 


Relations  with  UC  Davis  Engineering 


Lage:      You  had  mentioned  also  you  wanted  to  talk  about  relations  with 
departments  on  other  UC  campuses.  The  Davis  campus? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   What's  interesting  is  that  this  was  a  period  when 
engineering  was  being  established  on  other  campuses. 
Originally,  it  was  only  at  Berkeley,  then  UCLA,  and  then  other 
schools .   Davis  had  had  an  agricultural  engineering  department 
for  a  long  time—I  suppose  it  was  a  division  too,  when  there 
were  divisions  —  a  very  distinguished  program,  one  of  the  best  in 
the  country.   But  it  was  under  the  college  at  Berkeley. 

When  they  decided  they  wanted  to  have  a  full  engineering 
program— before  I  became  dean — it  was  decided  that  they  should 
still  be  under  the  college  at  Berkeley,  even  though  they  then 
were  including  electrical  engineering,  mechanical  engineering, 
and  other  fields.   So  when  I  became  dean,  I  was  dean  not  only 
for  Berkeley  but  for  Davis  engineering.   But  Roy  Bainer,  an 
internationally  known  agricultural  engineer  who  had  been  head  of 
that  program,  really  planned  and  guided  the  new  developments 
there.   He  was  a  very  fine  person  to  work  with. 


123 


Lage:      And  what  was  his  position? 

Whinnery:   He  was  appointed  as  an  associate  dean  of  the  college  at 

Berkeley.   He  really  did  the  planning  for  their  new  programs. 
We  had  many  discussions  and  all  of  the  approvals  had  to  go 
through  the  Berkeley  committees.   We  helped  with  that.   So  he 
always  appreciated  the  fact  that  this  helped  him  rather  than 
hindered  him. 

Lage:      That  must  have  grated  a  little  bit,  though,  having  to  go  through 
the  Berkeley  channels. 

Whinnery:   I  don't  think  so,  at  least  with  Bainer.   The  chancellor,  [Emil] 
Mrak,  who  was  a  very  ambitious  person  and  a  very  strong 
chancellor,  probably  wasn't  very  happy  about  it.   When  he  later 
called  me  in  and  said,  "We're  going  to  go  on  our  own,"  he  was  so 
surprised  when  I  said,  "Fine."   I  said  that  it  looked  like  it 
was  time  for  it.   So  that,  I  think,  went  quite  smoothly. 

Lage:      Do  you  remember  when  it  was  that  they  went  on  their  own? 
Sometime  during  those  four  years. 

Whinnery:   In  1962. 

Lage:      Then  did  a  close  connection  continue? 

Whinnery:   Actually,  yes.   Probably  not  as  close  as  before,  but  two  or 

three  of  the  faculty  moved  up  there--Clyne  Garland,  and  [Gerald 
T.]  Orlob  from  civil  engineering,  and  Warren  Goedt.   And  because 
of  Bainer 's  long  years  of  working  with  Berkeley,  he  remained  in 
close  contact. 


Relations  with  UC  Santa  Barbara  Engineering 


Whinnery:   The  experience  at  Santa  Barbara  was  a  little  less  pleasant. 

Normally,  we  would  not  have  gotten  involved  with  that  at  all. 
My  understanding  is  that  UCLA  had  opposed  Santa  Barbara's 
starting  engineering,  feeling  that  it  would  be  competitive  with 
them  in  southern  California.   I'm  not  sure  whether  that's 
correct  or  not,  but  that's  what  I  was  always  told. 

In  any  event,  the  first  dean  they  appointed,  [Albert  G. ] 
Conrad  from  Yale,  wanted  to  bring  about  seven  people  from  his 
faculty  at  Yale  as  a  group,  and  the  chancellor  at  Santa  Barbara, 
[Samuel  B.]  Gould,  approved  this.   But  it  came  to  Harry  Wellman 
as  acting  president.   He  thought  it  not  proper  to  bring  people 


124 


in  as  a  group,  that  one  should  look  at  them  individually.   All 
he  had  was  the  names.   He  asked  Roy  Bainer  at  Davis  and  me  to 
see  what  we  could  find  out  about  them.   Later  I  realized  how 
dumb  I  was,  because  it  should  have  been  the  responsibility  of 
Conrad  to  have  supplied  the  biographies.   But  anyway,  I  spent  a 
lot  of  time  in  the  library- - 

Lage:      Oh,  my  goodness,  that  would  be  quite  a  job. 

Whinnery:   And  I  didn't  find  out  much  about  many  of  these,  which  I  told 

him.   Roy  handled  it  much  better;  he  said,  "I  couldn't  appoint 
any  of  these  with  this  information."   [laughter] 

I  thought  this  report  was  confidential,  but  Conrad  found 
out  and  for  several  years  was  very  mad  at  me  in  particular  and 
Berkeley  in  general.   They  did  turn  down  his  request  to  bring 
these  persons  as  a  group. 

Lage:      Did  Yale  have  a  good  engineering  program  at  that  time? 

Whinnery:   It  wasn't  a  terribly  strong  one. 

Lage:      I  see.   So  just  coming  from  Yale  wasn't  enough. 

Whinnery:  No.  We  later  got  to  be  friends,  but  for  several  years  he  was 
pretty  annoyed  with  me. 

Lage:      What  did  he  do  after  that?  Did  he  go  about  in  the  traditional 
way  to  build  the  department? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  think  by  that  time  there  was  a  new  chancellor,  one  that 
wanted  to  follow  the  university  rules.  And  they  have  a  very 
distinguished  college  now.   So  it's  interesting  that  maybe  it 
didn't  matter  whether  they  started  in  a  cooperative  way  or  not, 
because  both  Davis  and  Santa  Barbara  have  turned  out  to  be  very 
fine  schools. 

Lage:      And  developed  in  such  a  different  way. 
Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:  Do  the  smaller — I'm  assuming  they're  smaller  schools—do  they 
concentrate  in  certain  areas,  or  do  they  have  a  full  range  of 
the  program? 

Whinnery:   They  have  a  pretty  full  program.  They  don't  have  every 

specialty  that  you  would  find  here.   But  Davis  is  not  a  small 
school,  really. 


125 


Lage:      How  about  Santa  Barbara? 

Whinnery:  Again,  it's  a  good-sized  school.  In  some  fields,  the  fields  of 
quantum  electronics  and  solid-state,  they're  one  of  the  tops  in 
the  country. 


Relations  with  "Teller  Tech,"  Livermore 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Now,  let's  see. 
Tech. 


You  also  mentioned  an  intriguing  thing:   Teller 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Oh,  yes.   Clark  Kerr  had  encouraged  some  way  of  using  the 
facilities  at  Livermore  for  education,  and  the  first  thing 
Edward  Teller  proposed  was  a  full  campus  there.   I  don't  know 
how  far  that  got,  but  by  the  time  I  got  into  it,  it  was  proposed 
as  a  graduate  program. 

And  was  it  engineering? 

No,  it  was  engineering  and  science—physics,  chemistry-- 

Oh,  across  the  board. 

I'm  not  sure  how  many  departments  it  was  proposed  to  have,  but 
certainly  chemistry,  physics,  and  engineering.  Mathematics,  I 
presume.   And  it  was  quite  controversial  on  this  campus.   First 
of  all,  Teller  was  controversial  in  his  own  right  —  the  H-bomb 
and  the  Oppenheimer  matter.   But  others  felt  that  the  program 
that  he  was  proposing  was  much  too  ambitious.   Anyway,  there  was 
a  committee  set  up  with  Carl  Helmholz  as  chairperson  to  look  at 
the  proposal,  and  the  committee  did  recommend  approval  with  some 
provisos.  The  main  one  was  that  the  students  in  that  program 
had  to  spend  some  time  on  the  Berkeley  campus,  if  it  was  to  be 
under  a  Berkeley  program.   I  always  thought  that  that  was  not 
acceptable  to  Teller  and  he  went  to  Davis  and  got  it  approved 
there.   It  turns  out,  in  talking  with  Clark  Kerr,  that  that  was 
not  the  case,  that  it  was  the  Educational  Policy  Committee  [of 
the  Academic  Senate]  in  Berkeley  that  turned  it  down. 

Oh,  after  the  Helmholz  committee,  they  didn't  accept  it? 

They  didn't  accept  our  committee  report.   And  so  it  was  set  up 
under  Davis  in  engineering.   Bainer  had  put  on  the  same 
condition  that  students  had  to  spend  some  time  at  Davis,  but  as 
I  understand  it,  that  is  not  required  now. 


126 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 

Lage: 
Whinnery : 


So  the  entire  educational  process  can  take  place  there? 

That's  my  understanding.   I  don't  know  just  when  it  changed. 
They  obviously  have  some  very  good  people  and  some  excellent 
facilities.   But  if  I  were  reviewing  it  again,  I  would  say  that 
if  it's  going  to  be  under  one  of  the  campuses,  that  the  students 
should  have  some  tie  to  that  campus,  too. 

Did  that  mean  that  the  Davis  professors  moved  out  there? 

Largely  I  think  it's  staffed  with  people  from  the  Lawrence 
Livermore  Laboratory,  and  they  have  some  excellent  people,  of 
course.   But  I  imagine  some  courses  are  given  by  Davis  faculty. 

Is  Teller  still  associated  with  it? 
Oh,  I  don't  think  so. 

Is  the  name  still  in  currency,  Teller  Tech?   [laughter]   I 
hadn't  heard  it  called  that. 

Yes,  informally.   It's  the  Department  of  Applied  Science  under 
Davis. 


Well,  that's  an  interesting  one. 
the  committees  at  all? 


Did  you  get  involved  on  any  of 


I  was  on  the  committee  with  Helmholz  and  talked  with  Teller 
several  times  individually.   His  first  proposal  for  the 
engineering  curriculum  I  didn't  think  very  good.  But  he  seemed 
to  accept  suggestions.   In  the  end,  the  faculty  is  the  key 
thing,  and  they  would  be  the  ones  that  would  make  the 
curriculum.   The  first  proposal  is  significant  in  that  that's 
where  you  start  looking  for  persons  in  certain  areas. 

Was  the  engineering  curriculum  focused  on,  say,  nuclear 
engineering? 

Not  particularly.   Well,  since  part  of  the  point  was  to  use  the 
facilities  there,  it  had  certainly  a  strong  complement  in 
nuclear.   But  other  things  such  as  laser  research  were  proposed. 

How  was  Teller  to  deal  with  on  a  one-to-one  basis? 

He  was  very  enthusiastic  about  whatever  he  was  doing.   And  he 
seemed  to  take  suggestions.   Some  people  would  warn  me  and  say, 
"This  is  just  maneuvering.   He'll  appear  to  take  suggestions  but 
won't  carry  them  through."  Well,  since  I  didn't  have  the 


127 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


opportunity  to  see  how  it  was  carried  through,  I  don't  know. 
But  I  think  some  of  the  points  got  across. 

He's  such  an  intriguing  figure. 
Yes,  he  certainly  is. 


International  Programs 


Lage:      Now,  what  have  we  missed? 

Whinnery:   Well,  somewhere  along  the  line,  1  think  the  international 
programs  are  worth  discussing. 

Lage:      That's  right.   You  mentioned  them  in  your  list,  and  I  hadn't 
been  aware  of  them,  so  tell  me. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   This  was  a  period  when  the  U.S.  government,  the  Ford 
Foundation,  and  other  agencies  were  trying  to  encourage 
cooperation  between  American  universities  and,  I  guess  you'd 
call  it  the  Third  World  institutions—programs  to  try  to  build 
them  up.   There  was  an  agency  in  the  U.S.  government,  I  believe 
AID,  Agency  for  International  Development.   And  the  Ford 
Foundation  was  very  active  and  had  a  tremendous  program.   We 
were  getting  requests  from  all  sorts  of  schools  from  all  over 
the  world  for  cooperative  programs. 

But  one  thing  we  had  decided  fairly  early  was  that  it 
wasn't  going  to  be  useful  to  go  into  schools  unless  there  was 
some  intellectual  match.   There  had  to  be  a  certain  level,  or 
there  couldn't  be  communication.   The  second  thing  is  that  we 
couldn't  do  everything;  we  could  expend  a  reasonable  amount  of 
our  resources  on  such  programs,  but  if  more  than  10  percent  of 
the  faculty  became  involved,  it  wouldn't  be  fair  to  obligations 
at  home. 

The  individual  faculty,  incidentally,  took  part  in  many 
other  international  programs  where  we  were  not  official 
sponsors,  in  addition  to  the  two  programs  that  we  sponsored. 
One  was  in  Chile  with  the  Catholic  University  of  Chile, 
sponsored  by  the  Ford  Foundation.   The  very  strong  dean,  Raul 
Deves,  was  trying  to  convince  us  to  go  in  with  them  on  a  program 
supported  by  the  Ford  Foundation.   At  first,  we  were  not  all 
that  impressed  with  what  we  heard  long-distance,  but  the  Ford 
Foundation  convinced  me  to  visit  Chile,  and  McGauhey,  the 


128 


director  of  the  Sanitary  Engineering  Research  Laboratory,  went 
with  me.  When  we  got  there,  we  were  very  much  more  impressed. 

Lage:      This  was  before  you  had  actually  signed  on? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   And  we  did  establish  an  official  program.   The  primary 
part  of  the  program  was  sending  Chilean  students  abroad  for 
education,  not  just  to  Berkeley,  but  to  Germany,  France, 
England,  and  schools  all  over  the  U.S. 

Lage:      Rather  than  building  up  an  institution  there? 

Whinnery:   They  were  to  get  Ph.D.  degrees  and  then  presumably  return  and 

enrich  their  native  countries.   In  addition,  we  had  some  of  our 
faculty  go  there.   We  had  some  very  good  people:   [Harry  D.] 
Huskey  in  computers;  [Theodore]  Van  Duzer;  Orlob,  whom  I 
mentioned  eventually  going  to  Davis. 

Lage:      How  long  would  they  stay? 
Whinnery:   Typically  one  to  two  years. 
Lage:      And  teach,  or  build  the  program? 

Whinnery:   Teach,  and  work  with  them  in  building  up  curriculum  and  research 
programs.   It  probably  was  one  of  the  most  successful  of  the 
international  programs,  until  the  revolutions  in  Chile.   I  was 
back  once  on  a  Ford  Foundation  evaluation  of  it  some  years 
later,  and  haven't  been  back  since,  but  I  am  told  by  people 
there  that  influences  of  the  program  remain,  even  though  they 
had  some  very  rough  times  through  the  political  upheavals. 
First,  when  [Salvador]  Allende  was  elected,  there  was  a  very 
politically-oriented  period,  and  persons  could  be  thrown  out  for 
their  politics-- 

Lage:      Out  of  the  university? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  out  of  the  university.   And  then  when  [Augusto]  Pinochet 

came  in,  that  was  really  a  revolution.   But  I  am  told  that  some 
of  the  remnants  of  the  program  still  live.   I've  forgotten  the 
number,  but  we  had  certainly  in  the  twenties  of  these  Chilean 
persons  who  got  Ph.D.s  and  returned,  becoming  heads  of 
departments,  heads  of  computer  centers,  just  exactly  the  way  the 
model  was  supposed  to  work. 

Lage:      Well,  that  sounds  very  encouraging. 

Whinnery:   Then  the  second  program  was  one  in  which  we  were  just  one  of  a 
consortium.   There  were  eight  schools--MIT,  Caltech,  Michigan, 


129 


Lage : 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery : 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Purdue,  Ohio  State,  Case,  Princeton,  and  Berkeley.   That  was  at 
Kanpur  in  India.  They  were  building  an  institute  of  technology 
at  Kanpur,  and  our  main  contribution  was  providing  some  very 
good  people.  Art  Bergen  was  one  who  went,  Huskey  on  the 
computer  side,  John  Kelly  from  math,  Arthur  Gill,  Wayne  Brown, 
and  McGauhey. 

Did  you  visit  there? 

No,  I  didn't  ever  visit  there. 


Who  was  the  lead  person  from  this? 
somebody  who  organized  it. 


There  must  have  been 


At  the  beginning,  this  was  something  that  I  did,  with  the  help 
of  Frances  Eberhart  in  working  with  the  administration  on  legal 
aspects,  which  I  didn't  understand  very  well.   In  the  trip  to 
Chile,  McGauhey  was  extremely  helpful.   First  of  all,  he  spoke 
Spanish,  which  I  did  not,  but  also  he  was  just  a  very  wonderful 
personality,  and  very  astute,  so  that  he  could  assess  the 
situation  very  well. 

Anyway,  eventually  we  had  Alex  [Alexander  C.]  Scordelis 
appointed  associate  dean  to  really  follow  the  programs.   I  guess 
we  saw  this  as  something  that  was  going  to  grow  and  grow,  which 
as  a  matter  of  fact  sort  of  tapered  off  shortly  after  that. 

Was  the  India  one  as  successful,  do  you  know? 

I  think  it  was  a  success.   We  get  many  good  graduates  from 
Kanpur.   In  fact,  I've  heard  it  described  as  the  top  technical 
university  of  India. 

That  sounds  like  a  gratifying  part  of  your  deanship. 
Yes,  I  think  it  was. 
How  did  you  like  Chile? 

Oh,  wondeifully.   Of  course,  the  trouble  is  it's  just  California 
upside-down. 

Yes,  the  reverse!  And  very  cosmopolitan,  I  hear. 

Yes.   The  Europeans  came  from  all  over—you  see  red-haired 
persons.   It  looked  so  funny  to  see  what  looked  like  a  typical 
Irishman  speaking  Spanish.   And  the  vegetation  has  been 
transported  back  and  forth  so  often  from  being  the  same 


130 


latitudes  that  it  looks  just  like  California,  especially  with 
the  ocean,  the  mountains,  and  the  coastal  plain. 


Relations  with  UCLA  Engineering 


Lage:      We  didn't  mention  UCLA  when  you  were  talking  about  the  various 
UC  campuses.   Did  you  have  a  formal  relationship  there,  or 
problems? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  think  we  had  problems.   First  of  all,  there  was  an 

Engineering  Advisory  Council,  which  worked  to  coordinate  all  the 
engineering  programs.   At  first,  it  worked  with  UCLA  and 
Berkeley,  and  then  as  newer  schools  came  in,  they  were  included. 
So  we  had  relations  that  way.   But  we  also  had  quite  a  few  other 
relations  with  [L.  M.  K. ]  Boelter.   UCLA  had  a  part  of  the 
Institute  of  Transportation  and  Traffic  Engineering;  also  water 
resources  was  set  up  as  a  statewide  project.   So  we  had  meetings 
about  those  projects  regularly. 

Lage:       But  it  was  smooth?   You  didn't  sense  a  competition? 

Whinnery:  No.  It  was  quite  a  different  program.  Boelter  had  a  concept  of 
unity  of  engineering.  He  had  one  department  of  engineering,  and 
much  more  interaction  among  the  parts  than  we  did. 

Lage:      Oh,  so  he  kept  one  department  as  O'Brien  had? 
Whinnery:   But  without  the  divisions. 
Lage:      Was  it  as  big  a  college? 

Whinnery:   It  wasn't  as  large  as  ours  then.   I  think  it  must  be  comparable 
now. 

Lage:      Do  you  know  if  it's  still  organized  that  way? 

Whinnery:   No.   It  was  a  very  idealistic  idea,  and  it  had  some  good  parts, 
but  it  was  really  unworkable  as  it  became  large. 

Lage:      We  still  have  a  few  things  to  go  on  the  college.   Do  you  feel 
like  we'd  do  better  starting  afresh? 

Whinnery:   I  think  so. 


131 


A  Status  Report  on  the  College  During  Whinnery's  Deanship 


[Interview  5:   March  2,  1994] 


Lage:      We  were  saying  before  we  turned  the  tape  on  that  sometimes  we 
forget  the  overall  picture,  which  was  a  very  healthy  one.   You 
were  going  to  start  today  by  giving  a  status  report  on  the 
college  at  the  time  of  your  deanship. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  thought  that  since  we've  talked  about  some  of  the 
problems,  many  of  them  not  all  that  important,  that  it  was 
desirable  to  point  out  the  status  of  the  college.   It  was  in 
very  good  shape,  thanks  to  Mike  O'Brien's  building  of  it  for  so 
many  years.   The  faculty  committees  were  working  on  the 
curriculum.  We  probably  will  want  to  discuss  the  curriculum 
later.   The  staff  in  the  office  was  excellent.   We've  already 
talked  about  Frances  Eberhart  and  Don  Horning,  but  also  in  the 
student  offices,  Vi  [Violetta]  Lane  with  the  undergraduates,  and 
Esther  Robertson  in  the  graduate  office,  and  their  staffs,  were 
excellent.   The  associate  and  assistant  deans  were  tremendously 
dedicated  and  helpful. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  the  same  associate  and  assistants  over  your  period 
of  time? 

Whinnery:   I  didn't  change  them  at  the  beginning,  and  in  general  not  until 
they  wished  to  change.   Clyne  Garland  was  the  associate  dean, 
very  hardworking,  a  very  fine  person.   He  stayed  until  he 
decided  to  go  to  Davis  with  Bainer  when  Davis  became  a  separate 
college.   [Leonard]  Black  was  in  charge  of  the  graduate  office. 
Ralph  Hultgren  and  Herbert  Scott  were  in  the  undergraduate 
office—all  of  them  very  effective. 

Lage:      Did  they  get  some  relief  from  teaching  duties  for  this  kind  of 
office? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  think  it  was  typically  a  half-time  position,  but  it 
depended  on  the  assignment. 

Lage:      So  were  these  people  you  could  leave  with  an  area  to  take  care 
of  and  be  confident  that  it  was  taken  care  of? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  work-study  program,  the  co-op  program,  Lysle  Shaffer 
was  assistant  dean  in  charge  of  that,  and  that  was  very 
successful  and  ran  smoothly. 


132 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Would  you  want  to  just  say  a  few  words  about  that? 
believe  we've  discussed  it,  have  we? 


I  don't 


No,  I  don't  think  we've  mentioned  it  before.   This  was  something 
that  O'Brien  started  in  1948.   There  were  other  models  of  co-op 
programs  around  the  country  at  that  time.   MIT  had  one,  and 
there  were  others.   In  these  programs  students  typically  take 
five  years  to  graduate,  but  they  have  two  or  three  work  periods 
during  those  five  years.   In  general,  they  do  better.   I  would 
frequently  get  calls  from  parents  who  would  be  concerned  about 
students  going  into  this—wouldn't  it  interfere  with  their 
scholarship—but  usually  their  scholarship  improved,  I  guess 
because  of  motivation. 

Lage:      So  they  would  take  a  semester  off  and  work  in  an  engineering 
firm,  is  that  the  way  it  works? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  pattern  of  work  versus  study  has  varied  during  the 

life  of  the  program,  but  during  the  five  years,  they  would  have 
had  more  than  a  year  of  work  experience. 

Lage:      Was  that  designed  for  people  who  weren't  thinking  of  going  on  to 
graduate  school,  or  did  it  matter? 

Whinnery:   No.   I  think  because  of  motivation,  it  probably  increased  the 
chances  of  their  going  on,  as  they  worked  with  people  in  the 
industries  and  realized  the  importance  of  additional  study. 

Lage:      Is  that  something  that  continues? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes,  it  continues,  and  it's  still  very  successful.   It  ran 
smoothly,  but  it  did  take  time  because  of  the  visits  to 
companies.   Not  every  job,  of  course,  would  be  suitable  for  a 
work-study  assignment. 

Lage:      So  you  had  to  have  some  review  of  the  job  assignment. 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   We  tried  to  have  faculty  visit  every  one  of  them 
over  a  period  of  a  few  years,  but  probably  couldn't  achieve  that 
ideal. 

Also,  the  relations  with  the  community  colleges  were  very 
good.   The  Office  of  Relations  with  Schools  had  a  person,  Bonham 
Campbell,  who  concentrated  on  engineering,  and  we  had  a  lot  of 
the  faculty  visiting  the  junior  colleges  and  the  state  colleges, 
later  state  universities,  too. 

Lage:      Was  this  with  an  eye  to  preparing  the  transfer  students? 


133 


Whinnery:   That's  right.   In  particular,  whenever  we  would  make  a  change  in 
curriculum,  we  would  set  up  visits  to  the  community  colleges  to 
tell  them  about  it.   We  also  set  up  summer  institutes  on  the  new 
courses. 

Lage:      I  can  see  that  becoming  very  complex,  as  you're  doing  a 
curriculum  revision. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  that's  right.   Of  course  it  was  becoming  more  complicated 
during  this  period  because  of  the  new  campuses.   Originally, 
engineering  students  in  the  community  colleges  who  wanted  to  go 
on  largely  transferred  to  Berkeley.   Then  of  course,  with  UCLA, 
they  had  quite  a  different  program.   Transfer  students  had  to 
choose,  or  work  out  a  program  that  was  somewhat  of  a  compromise. 

Lage:      Yes,  then  you  have  Santa  Barbara,  and  Davis-- 

Whinnery:   Yes.   At  that  stage  it  became  almost  impossible  for  the 

community  colleges  to  have  a  program  that  would  make  it  possible 
to  transfer  to  any  one  of  these  without  some  makeup  work. 

Lage:      As  the  curriculum  became  more  sophisticated  or  more  research- 
oriented,  did  your  community  college  teachers  have  any 
difficulty  in  doing  the  revisions  of  their  curricula? 

Whinnery:  Yes,  I  think  the  two  courses  that  gave  them  some  problems  were 
the  materials  course  in  the  lower  division,  and  the  electrical 
engineering  course  was  probably  the  hardest  of  all. 

Lage:      But  the  summer  institutes  helped  cover  that? 

Whinnery:   They  helped,  certainly.   And  of  course,  some  of  these  schools 
had  people  that  were  expert  in  electronics.   If  they  did,  it 
went  fairly  well.   If  they  didn't,  it  was  very  hard  for  them. 

Lage:      Did  they  go  so  far  as  to  adopt  the  books  used  here? 

Whinnery:   In  some  cases,  yes.   If  most  of  their  transfers  did  go  to 

Berkeley,  then  they  would  try  to  pattern  it  after  the  Berkeley 
program.   But  if  their  transfers  went  to  a  variety  of  schools, 
it  was  harder.   We  had  to  set  up  adjustments,  so  if  they  came 
without  a  given  course,  there  was  a  way  of  making  it  up  without 
putting  them  too  far  behind. 

Lage:      Did  the  school  continue  to  encourage  that  sort  of  a  pattern  of 
attending  junior  college  and  then  transferring  to  the 
university? 


134 


Whinnery : 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Yes.   As  I  understand  it,  there  is  more  of  a  dichotomy  in  the 
transfer  students  now.   There  still  are  some  very  good  ones  that 
come  from  the  community  colleges,  but  there  is  much  more 
unevenness  than  there  used  to  be.   We  may  have  mentioned  this 
before,  but  one  thing  that  helped  at  that  time  was  that  we  could 
use  a  differential.   From  the  colleges  that  had  the  most 
transfers,  a  record  was  kept  of  how  students  did  in  comparison 
with  the  grade  point  that  they  came  in  with. 

So  you  evaluated  the  school. 


Evaluated  the  schools, 
now. 


As  I  understand  it,  that  can't  be  done 


Lage: 


I've  always  heard  that  private  universities  and  colleges  do  that 
with  high  schools. 

Yes.   They  used  to  do  it  with  high  schools  here,  but  I'm  not 
sure  that  they  do  now. 

They  might  feel  that  it's  unfair  to  the  student  who  happens  to 
be  in  a  poor  district. 

Yes. 

But  coming  back  again  to  the  status  of  the  college.   As  I 
say,  the  reputation  certainly  was  already  high,  even  though  I 
think  the  first  of  these  many  surveys  that  placed  us  in  the 
second  slot  to  MIT  was  somewhat  later.   Of  course,  the 
reputation  had  to  have  been  built  before  the  survey.   In  fact, 
the  surveying,  as  I  recall  the  dates  on  that,  was  probably  going 
on  at  about  that  period.   So  the  school,  the  college,  did  have  a 
very  fine  reputation  around  the  country.   So  there  were  a  lot 
of— 

A  lot  of  good  things. 

A  lot  of  very  good  things.   The  Institute  of  Engineering 
Research  that  O'Brien  had  set  up  with  Paki  [Henry]  Schade  as  its 
first  director  ran  very  smoothly.   Earl  Parker  took  over  from 
him,  and  George  Maslach  was,  I  believe,  an  associate  director. 
They  worked  very  hard  to  help  the  new  young  faculty  find 
research  support.   That  was  their  emphasis  and  it  was  very 
successful. 

I  see  a  lot  of  attention  to  detail  and  to  the  whole  picture.   Is 
this  something  engineers  are  particularly  good  at?   [laughter] 


135 


Whinnery:   Well,  I  don't  know.   It  was  a  pretty  complicated  arrangement, 
but  thanks  to  the  many  people  that  were  working  at  it,  it  ran 
pretty  smoothly  for  the  most  part.   We  talked  about  a  few  of  the 
glitches,  and  that's  why  I  wanted  to  get  across  the  overall 
picture  that  things  for  the  most  part  were  going  well. 

Lage:      I  hope  that  comes  across.   That's  certainly  been  my  impression, 
that  things  were  good,  but  I  know  when  you  start  talking  about 
problems—because  sometimes  they're  the  most  interesting  things 
to  get  into—you  forget  this  larger  picture. 


Curriculum 


Lage:      Are  there  any  other  things  along  that  line  in  terms  of  the 
status  report  that  you  had  thought  to  mention? 

Whinnery:   I  think  we  want  to  talk  about  curriculum  in  some  detail. 

Lage:      Good.   Why  don't  we  start  with  curriculum  and  what  kinds  of 
changes  were  taking  place? 


Break-up  of  the  Common  Lower  Division 


Whinnery:   I  think  the  most  important  change  was  in  the  common  lower 

division.  It  was  somewhere  in  the  early  fifties  that  the  common 
lower  division  that  O'Brien  had  worked  so  hard  for  was  effected. 
In  addition  to  physics,  math,  and  chemistry,  and  the  humanities, 
there  was  to  be  one  engineering  course  each  term.  He  wanted  all 
of  the  departments  to  be  represented.  The  hardest  one  to  work 
in  was  electrical  engineering. 

The  old  surveying  course  was  made  into  a  measurements 
course,  which,  in  addition  to  physical  measurements,  was  to 
include  electrical  measurements.   But  this  was  in  the  freshman 
year  when  students  hadn't  had  the  electrical  physics  course.   So 
the  measurement  of  electrical  things  just  didn't  work.   There 
was  some  statistical  approach  to  measurement,  but  the  students 
didn't  have  background  in  statistics  either,  so  that  was 
probably  the  least  successful  of  the  courses. 

Lage:      Could  that  have  been  put  to  the  second  year,  or  it  was  necessary 
for  something  in  the  second  year? 


136 


Whinnery:   Even  if  it  had  been  put  in  the  second  year- -and  of  course,  there 
were  other  things  that  it  had  to  compete  with—the  students 
still  would  not  have  really  had  a  very  strong  background  for 
measurement.   I  think  the  mix  of  the  two  things  was  artificial. 

Probably  the  most  successful  of  the  new  courses  was  the 
materials  science  course.   That  is  still  going  on,  with,  of 
course,  obvious  revisions  over  the  period  of  years.   Of  the 
other  two,  the  graphics  course  was  changing  somewhat  already 
from  the  old  mechanical  drawing  course,  beginning  to  use  new 
techniques,  although  not  yet  the  sophisticated  computer 
techniques  we  have  now.   [Alexander]  Levens  was  considered  one 
of  the  top  people  in  the  country  in  graphics,  and  tried  to  keep 
it  up-to-date.   So  that  went  quite  well.   And  then  the  mechanics 
course,  which  is  standard.   [James  L.]  Meriam  was  a  leader  in 
that. 

Lage:      Were  these  courses  that  are  standard  also  undergoing  revision? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Sort  of  a  continual  revision,  but  I  think  at  the  time  that 
the  —  I'll  call  it  the  O'Brien  lower  division—was  put  in,  there 
was  a  purposeful  rethinking  of  each  course  with  a  major  revision 
at  that  time. 

Lage:      Even  though  the  course  is  thought  of  as  one  professor's  course- 
that  '  s  the  way  you  seem  to  talk  about  it— do  others  feed  into 
them? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   Certainly  when  I  mentioned  Meriam  and  Levens,  there 
were  others  working  with  them.   But  in  those  two  courses,  they 
were  the  leaders. 


Lage: 


The  problem  still  was  that  electrical  engineering  felt  left 
out  of  all  of  this.   If  the  point  of  a  common  lower  division  was 
so  that  students  could  see  the  various  fields  and  then  choose 
their  major,  it  wasn't  working  for  electrical  engineering.   So 
in  the  curriculum  discussions  that  occurred  in  the  late  fifties 
and  into  the  sixties,  the  emphasis  was  on  getting  something  in 
electrical  engineering.   We  also  thought  it  important  that  all 
engineers  have  at  least  an  introduction  to  electrical  and 
electronics  engineering. 

The  course  we  started  was  called  Introduction  to  Electrical 
Circuit  Systems  and  Devices.  It  was  sort  of  an  overview,  but  it 
did  try  to  have  some  depth. 

Now,  when  you  say  you  wanted  it  to  be  of  value  to  others,  do  you 
mean  to  people  who  weren't  going  into  electrical  engineering? 


137 


Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Yes.   But  it  turns  out  that  other  departments  didn't  want  it 
that  much.   I  think  mechanical  engineering  required  it  for  a 
while.  Certainly  not  the  whole  college.   So  that,  I  guess, 
triggered  the  breakup  of  the  common  lower  division,  for  better 
or  worse. 

Has  it  broken  up  more  now? 

Yes.   And  now  students  are  admitted  to  their  majors  when  they 
apply  as  freshmen.   Which  is  too  bad,  in  a  way. 

They  get  more  depth  in  their  field,  I  guess. 

Some,  but  a  case  can  be  made  for  a  need  of  breadth  at  that 
level.   But  part  of  it  is  the  relative  demand  for  the  different 
fields.   In  recent  years,  electrical  engineering  has  had  far 
more  students  who  are  admissible  to  Berkeley  who  wanted 
electrical  engineering  than  could  possibly  be  handled.   So  the 
department  has  a  separate  quota.   I  don't  know  the  status  of 
some  of  the  other  departments,  but  there  is  a  difference  in 
demand  between  the  different  departments. 


So  it's  harder  to  get  into  electrical  engineering  than, 
mechanical  engineering? 


say. 


I  believe  so.   Engineering  science  and  electrical  engineering 
have  the  highest  ratio  of  applicants  to  admits.   It's 
interesting  that  the  exams  for  entrance  to  freshman  and  junior 
level  that  O'Brien  started  were  stopped  eventually  by  the 
Academic  Senate  under  the  grounds  that  anyone  admitted  to  the 
university  should  have  free  choice  in  curriculum.   But  when  it 
was  discovered  that  we  couldn't  possibly  take  care  of  all  of 
these  applicants,  why,  then  the  quotas  were  again  put  in.   I 
don't  remember  when  the  quotas  were  put  in;  this  was  after  the 
period  I  was  dean. 

Not  based  on  your  special  exams,  but  just  on  your  evaluation  of 
record? 

Just  on  records,  the  SATs,  and  the  essay. 

During  the  time  when  you  were  dean,  what  was  the  situation? 

We  still  had  the  exams  for  the  freshman  and  junior  year.   I 
believe  they  were  stopped  around  1964. 


Lage: 


Did  you  have  to  deal  with  the  Academic  Senate  on  that? 


138 


Whinnery:   No.   There  may  have  been  some  preliminary  discussion  on  the 
issue.   I  think  the  faculty  didn't  really  argue  about  it  too 
much,  because  the  exams  had  pretty  much  served  their  purpose  and 
there  were  other  ways  of  evaluating  students.   It  was  a 
tremendous  operation,  giving  the  exams  throughout  the  state. 

Lage:      Who  read  the  exams? 

Whinnery:   Some  of  the  faculty  were  involved  in  it,  but  most  of  it  was  such 
that  the  exams  could  be  read  by  the  staff.   Although  a  lot  of 
work,  it  ran  pretty  smoothly. 

Lage:      What  an  operation.   I  hadn't  really  thought  of  it 
administratively,  what  it  would  involve. 


Specialization  in  the  Upper  Division  Curriculum 


Lage:      Were  there  changes  in  the  upper  division  curriculum  that  you 
were  involved  in? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  upper  division,  for  the  most  part,  is  set  by  the 

individual  departments.   But  changes  do  have  to  be  approved  by 
the  college  and  there  would  be  argument  in  the  college  meetings 
about  some  changes.   The  main  change  which  was  starting  then  and 
has  continued  even  more  since,  is  the  cutting  back  of  courses  in 
common.   When  I  was  in  school,  for  example,  even  in  the  upper 
division  most  of  my  courses  were  in  mechanical  and  civil 
engineering,  more  so  than  in  electrical.   Now,  of  course,  all 
that's  required  is,  I  think,  six  units  in  some  other  department 
or  some  other  parts  of  the  college.   There  was  a  required  course 
in  engineering  economics.   There  was  a  course  called 
Introduction  to  the  Profession,  which  in  part  was  an  emphasis  on 
giving  oral  and  written  reports.   I  thought  it  a  useful  course, 
but  eventually  it  was  given  up  as  a  required  course.   Electrical 
engineers  used  to  have  to  take  mechanics  in  the  upper  division, 
heat  power,  and  strength  of  materials.   I  think  those  were  cut 
back  one  at  a  time. 

Lage:      Were  they  required  previously  because  there  was  a  closer 

connection  between  the  fields,  or  just  a  sense  that  you  should 
know  what  else  is  going  on? 

Whinnery:   Part  of  it  is  historical.   Originally  there  was  only  civil 

engineering.   Mechanical  engineering  became  a  specialty  of  that, 
and  then  electrical  engineering  grew  out  of  mechanical 
engineering.   Also,  many  people  believe  that  an  engineer  should 


139 


not  be  too  narrow,  that  an  electrical  engineer  should  be  able  to 
handle  the  thermal  and  stress  problems  of  a  design  as  well  as 
the  electrical  problems.   And  ideally,  I  think  there's  very 
little  argument  about  it.   The  problem  is  time,  of  course. 

Lage:      In  acquiring  the  specialized  knowledge. 

Whinnery:   So  the  education  has  become  more  and  more  specialized.   And  this 
is  true  not  just  of  electrical  engineering.   Civil  engineers 
used  to  have  a  course  in  electrical  engineering,  and  they  gave 
that  up. 

Lage:      And  it's  happening  outside  engineering,  as  other  fields  become 
more  and  more  specialized. 

Whinnery:   Right. 


The  Social  Science  Requirement 


Whinnery:   Now,  the  other  curriculum  matter  I  wanted  to  talk  about  is  the 

humanistic,  social  part  of  the  program.   The  accrediting  agency, 
which  was  then  the  Engineering  Council  for  Professional 
Development  and  is  now  ABET,  Accrediting  Board  for  Engineering 
and  Technology,  requires  about  one-eighth  of  the  program  to  be 
in  humanistic,  social  studies.   That's  the  equivalent  of  about 
one  semester.   I  believe  this  requirement  was  put  in  sometime 
after  World  War  II. 

Lage:      And  previous  to  that  had  there  not  been  a  requirement  along 
those  lines? 

Whinnery:   I  believe  not.   Certainly  when  I  was  in  school,  I  believe  there 
was  no  such  requirement. 

Lage:      You  didn't  have  to  take  an  English  course? 

Whinnery:   I  had  several  in  junior  college.   I  don't  know  if  the  lower 

division  students  here  had  such  a  requirement.   In  any  event, 
when  the  requirement  was  first  instituted,  students  chose 
courses  more  or  less  at  random.   O'Brien  was  concerned  about  how 
to  use  this  requirement  more  effectively.   A  number  of 
constraints  were  put  in.   The  trouble  is  there  were  so  few 
units,  but  even  so,  there  was  supposed  to  be  some  concentration 
in  about  half  of  the  program,  and  then  also  some  breadth. 


Lage: 


How  many  courses  were  involved  here? 


140 


Whinnery:   Well,  if  we're  talking  twenty  units  or  so,  five  or  six  courses. 
Lage:      Five  or  six  courses  over  the  four  years? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Anyway,  O'Brien  brought  in  a  number  of  people  to  advise 
him  on  this.   Burchard  was  a  dean  of  humanities  at  MIT;  Le 
Corbeiller  was  in  the  general  education  program  at  Harvard;  and 
some  others.   Also,  in  talking  with  people  on  the  other  side  of 
the  campus,  he  established  Social  Sciences  1A/B.   Lewis  Feuer, 
Van  Dusen  Kennedy,  and  others  started  a  very  interesting  course 
which  used  original  sources,  including  Freud  and  Karl  Marx.   It 
originally  had  mostly  engineering  students,  but  began  to  be 
popular  for  others  around  the  campus.   This  course  was  very 
successful  for  a  number  of  years. 

Lage:      And  it  was  designed  to  fill  this  engineering  need? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  that's  right. 

Lage:      But  was  offered  to  everyone. 

Whinnery:   Others  did  take  it.   Not  everybody  liked  it,  but  we  would  hear 
more  discussion  about  this  from  the  students  than  anything  that 
we'd  had  before.   But  after  a  period  of  years  it  became 
difficult  to  get  good  instructors  for  it.   It  was  considered  a 
service  course,  and  the  instructors  didn't  get  respect  from 
their  departments  for  teaching  it.   It's  fairly  typical  that 
innovations  have  a  limited  lifetime.   But  nevertheless,  it  was 
quite  successful  for  a  number  of  years. 

Anyway,  as  we  began  to  realize  the  end  of  this  was  coming, 
and  the  social  science  course  was  given  up  somewhere  during  the 
period  when  I  was  dean,  we  still  continued  trying  to  get  people 
in  to  advise  us.   We  had  C.  P.  Snow  of  The  Two  Cultures1  and  a 
former  president  of  Harvard,  [James  Bryant]  Conant,  and  others. 
In  particular,  they  talked  with  engineering  and  L  &  S  faculty 
and  helped  us  make  a  list  of  courses  that  would  be  acceptable. 
I  guess  that's  still  more  or  less  the  plan  that's  being  used. 
But  it's  very  difficult  with  the  small  number  of  units  to 
believe  that  you're  making  an  educated  person-- 

Lage:      Yes,  make  a  meaningful  group  of  courses.   But  it's  certainly  a 
noble  effort  that  you  were  making,  it  sounds  like  to  me.   You 
took  it  very  seriously. 


'C.  P.  Snow,  The  Two  Cultures: 
University  Press,  1963. 


And  A  Second  Look,  Cambridge, 


141 


Whinnery:  Yes.  It  should  be  a  meaningful  part  of  the  education,  and  not 
just  courses  selected  by  students  just  because  the  courses  are 
easy  for  them. 

Lage:      That's  very  interesting.   Did  C.  P.  Snow  have  an  interesting 
take  on  it? 

Whinnery:   His  public  lectures  were  disappointing. 


Whinnery:   Do  you  know  the  book,  The  Two  Cultures'! 
Lage:      Yes. 

Whinnery:   Well,  those  lectures  were  a  rehash  of  that,  but  he  was  tired  of 
it,  and  they  didn't  come  across  well.   But  when  we  got  him  in  a 
room  with  a  case  of  cabernet  and  twenty  or  thirty  people,  we  had 
a  wonderful  dialogue  —  or  multilogue,  I  guess  it  would  be.   He 
used  the  Socratic  method;  if  you  asked  him  a  question,  he  would 
ask  one  back. 

Lage:      Did  he  come  for  a  period  of  time? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   He  was  here  several  weeks. 

Lage:      So  you  set  up  some  situations  like  you've  described. 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   Also,  he  and  his  wife  invited  students  in  for 
tea.   They  had  a  place  up  on  Euclid  not  too  far  away  from 
campus.   Students  got  a  lot  out  of  that;  again  the  same  Socratic 
method,  I  guess. 

Lage:      That's  really  interesting.   And  when  you  arranged  the  seminar- 
like  settings,  were  these  with  people  from  the  humanities  and 
social  sciences  as  well? 

Whinnery:   Some  were.   The  meeting  I  mentioned  with  the  case  of  cabernet 
was  at  the  Faculty  Club  with  the  Dean's  Coordinating  Advisory 
Council--DCAC.   But  his  visit  was  partly  sponsored  by  the 
English  Department  because  of  his  novels,  so  we  had  some  joint 
meetings. 

Lage:      Well,  that  must  have  brought  new  perspective,  and  kind  of 
stimulated  that  effort  to  bridge  the  two  cultures. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Of  course  he  was  interested  in  having  humanists  learn 
about  science  and  technology  as  well  as  the  reverse. 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


142 

Any  other  things  on  curriculum  that  we  should  talk  about? 
I  think  those  are  probably  the  major  matters. 

It  sounds  like  sort  of  a  general  evolution  with  no  strong  breaks 
at  any  point. 


Whinnery:   Yes. 


Engineering  Science  Program,  and  the  Three-Two  Program 


Whinnery:   Oh,  there  are  two  things  I  might  mention.   The  engineering 

science  program,  which  was  started  after  the  war,  first  with 
engineering  physics  and  engineering  geophysics,  was  a  very 
successful  program,  and  still  is.   During  the  period  we're 
discussing,  it  was  broadened  to  other  fields,  including  for  a 
while  materials  science  and  operations  research.   Both  of  these 
fields  were  developed  first  under  that  program  before  operations 
research  became  a  part  of  the  industrial  engineering  department 
and  materials  science  became  a  major  part  of  what  was  then  the 
mineral  technology  department. 

Lage:      You  mean  these  two  fields  grew  out  of  the  engineering  science 
program? 

Whinnery:   Their  first  development  as  curricula.   Then  they  became  major 
parts  of  their  department  programs.   Then  engineering 
mathematics  and  engineering  mathematical  statistics  were  added 
as  parts  of  the  engineering  science  programs. 

Lage:      Are  these  basically  majors  that  are  parts  of  the  engineering 
science  major? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Let's  take  engineering  physics.   The  goal  of  the  program 
is  that  a  student  who  graduates  in  that  major  is  prepared  to  go 
to  graduate  work  either  in  physics  or  in  the  field  of 
engineering  selected  by  his  electives--typically  either 
electrical,  mechanical,  nuclear,  or  material  science.   The  same 
thing  is  presumably  true  in  the  engineering  mathematics  program. 
It  is  a  very  successful  program  and  has  some  of  the  highest 
scholarship  students  applying  for  it.   And  a  very  high 
percentage  continue  for  graduate  work,  some  in  engineering  and 
some  in  science. 

Lage:      Sounds  like  a  very  good  background. 


143 


Whirmery:   So  the  development  of  that,  adding  the  two  or  three  specialties 
to  the  engineering  physics  and  engineering  geophysics  was  a 
contribution.   All  of  these  curriculum  things,  you  understand, 
come  from  the  faculty. 

Lage:      Someone  would  bring  forth  the  idea? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   There  are  faculty  curriculum  committees.   Some  of  the 

ideas  would  come  from  those  committees,  and  others  would  be  from 
an  individual  making  suggestions  to  the  committee.   Of  course 
the  dean  can  make  such  suggestions. 

Lage:      Would  the  thrust  for  the  engineering  science  programs  usually 
come  from  engineering,  or  from  physics  or  math  or  geology? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know  the  details,  but  proposals  for  joint  programs 

typically  start  with  informal  discussions  between  persons  who 
are  already  cooperating  on  some  project.   And  once  it  was  found 
that  the  engineering-physics  program  was  working  well,  it  was 
natural  to  think  of  other  extensions. 

There  was  one  other  program  that  we  spent  some  time  with 
that  didn't  pan  out.   A  number  of  schools  have  what  they  call 
two-three  or  three-two  programs.   Students  after  two  or  three 
years  in  a  liberal  arts  college  may  transfer  to  three  or  two 
years  of  engineering,  often  in  another  university.   We  were 
trying  to  work  out  something  similar  here.   There  was  a  very 
good  committee.   I  don't  remember  all  the  members,  but  I  know 
that  Tom  Everhart,  who  had  come  from  Harvard,  was  very 
enthusiastic  about  it. 

It  turned  out  the  problem  was  that  if  they'd  had  the  math 
and  science  in  their  first  two  years,  there  was  no  particular 
problem,  but  also  there  was  no  particular  problem  without  having 
such  a  program.   They  could  come  in  and  make  up  the  missing  one 
or  two  engineering  courses.   On  the  other  hand,  if  they  hadn't 
had  the  math  and  science,  they  couldn't  finish  in  three  more 
years  anyway. 

Lage:      It's  like  starting  over. 

Whinnery:   It's  like  starting  over  again.   Also,  the  engineering  science 

programs  were  providing  some  of  the  flexibility  we  were  looking 
for.   So  I  don't  know,  maybe  we  could  have  found  a  solution-- 
certainly  these  programs  exist  around  the  country,  and  some  of 
them  seem  to  be  quite  successful. 


Lage: 


What  is  the  goal  of  a  program  like  that? 


144 


Whinnery:   I  think  it's  to  get  people  into  engineering  that  are  a  little 
broader—it's  the  same  goal  as  the  humanistic,  social 
requirement,  but  carried  a  step  further. 

Lage:      C.  P.  Snow's  types. 
Whinnery:   Yes. 


Engineering  Advisory  Council 


Whinnery:   Sometime  you  wanted  to  ask,  you  said,  about  the  Engineering 
Advisory  Council. 

Lage:      Yes.   What  they  were,  and  what  their  role  was. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   This  was  a  group,  started  by  O'Brien,  of  very 

distinguished  people,  selected  to  give  advice  on  major  policy 
issues.   Most,  but  not  all,  were  alumni.   Of  course,  O'Brien 
also  used  them  to  support  programs  that  he  was  trying  to  sell  at 
that  time  to  Sproul.   Sproul  knew  many  of  these  people 
personally,  and  I  think  probably  the  biggest  success  they  had 
was  in  the  Engineering  Field  Station.   They  certainly  played  a 
major  role  in  convincing  the  university  that  that  made  sense, 
and  I  think  even  perhaps  in  helping  locate  the  site.   That's  all 
described  in  O'Brien's  oral  history. 

Lage:      It  had  a  bit  of  a  political  purpose,  you  could  say. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Anyway,  they  were  a  group  of  very  dedicated,  very 

distinguished  people,  and  continued  to  support  the  university  in 
many  ways.   During  the  period  I  was  dean,  I  appreciated  their 
support  very  much.   With  the  new  campuses,  they  had  worked  with 
Boelter  in  building  up  UCLA  as  they  had  here.   In  fact,  one  of 
the  major  issues  was  that  of  an  engineering  field  station  for 
UCLA,  and  they  were  helpful  in  that. 

Lage:      Was  this  Engineering  Advisory  Council  a  statewide  group,  then? 

Whinnery:  At  that  point  it  was.  In  fact,  as  the  newer  campuses  proposed 
engineering  programs  it  tried  to  play  a  major  role  in  deciding 
whether  engineering  should  be  on  all  campuses. 

Lage:      This  is  quite  an  important  role  for  basically  an  outside 
committee. 


145 


Whinnery:   Yes.   But  as  I  recall,  they  were  not  in  favor  of  the  Santa 
Barbara  program,  and  it  went  ahead  anyway.   Of  course,  no 
advisory  group  expects  its  advice  to  be  taken  absolutely.   I 
think  it  became  less  influential  in  major  decisions  like  that, 
but  the  support  was  certainly  valuable. 

Lage:      Was  the  influence  also  related  to  Sproul's  leaving  and  Kerr 
being  in,  and  others? 

Whinnery:   It  may  have  been  partly  that.   I  think  the  biggest  influence  was 
the  multi-campus  growth  of  engineering.   For  a  while  it  tried  to 
operate  with  a  subcommittee  for  each  campus.   Finally  it  evolved 
to  advisory  groups  individually  for  the  different  campuses,  as 
we  have  for  Berkeley  now. 

Did  you  have  regular  meetings  of  this  group? 
Yes.   About  twice  a  year,  as  I  recall. 

I'm  just  wondering  how  you  used  the  meetings,  or  what  you  saw  as 
the  role?  Were  you  informing  them  about  what  went  on,  or  were 
you  seeking  their  advice? 

Since  it  was  then  statewide,  all  of  the  deans  would  suggest 
items  for  the  agenda,  and  the  committee  members  would  of  course 
be  polled  to  see  if  they  had  items,  too. 

Was  it  more  than  a  window-dressing  kind  of  thing? 

It's  a  little  hard  to  know  how  much  you  get  out  of  any  given 
meeting.   But  the  discussion,  even  when  the  advice  is  not  taken 
in  detail,  can  be  very  valuable.   Often  the  preparation  for 
presentation  of  problems  and  goals  to  a  savvy  group  of  persons 
who  are  going  to  listen  to  what  you  have  to  say  is  the  most 
valuable  part. 

Lage:      Were  there  any  particular  outstanding  members  of  the  group  that 
you  relied  on? 

Whinnery:   One  of  the  most  interesting  was  Doolittle. 
Lage:      Is  this  Jimmy  Doolittle? 

Whinnery:   Jimmy  Doolittle.   He  was  a  very  dedicated,  very  thoughtful,  very 
nice  person.   Perry  Yates,  a  vice  president  of  Bechtel,  was  very 
helpful.   George  Tenney  of  McGraw-Hill  was  the  chairman  of  the 
group,  and  very  effective  in  getting  the  agenda  together  and 
running  the  meeting.   John  Kemper,  then  of  Marchant,  later 
became  a  faculty  member  at  Davis  and  was  dean  of  engineering 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


146 


there.   Lou  Oppenheim,  of  Kaiser,  is  still  active  in  fund 
raising  for  the  university.   There  were  others  who  were  helpful 
but  this  gives  some  feeling  for  the  level. 

Lage:      Would  they  ever  feed  into  curriculum  discussion,  or  anything 
that  specific? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  think  they  tried  to  get  into  details  of  curriculum,  but 
did  discuss  general  issues  such  as  the  importance  of  humanities 
and  social  sciences,  and  general  engineering  versus 
specialization.   Things  of  that  nature.   They  would  give  advice 
on  new  programs  proposed  by  any  of  the  deans. 


Engineering  Alumni  Society 


Lage:      You  also  mentioned  the  Engineering  Alumni  Society,  and  the 
changing  roles  of  that. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   This  had  been  started  by  O'Brien  and  was  growing  and 
becoming  increasingly  important.   Now  it's  tremendously 
important  to  the  college. 

Lage:      In  what  way? 

Whinnery:   First  of  all,  fund  raising.   Well,  I  shouldn't  say  first, 

although  that's  important,  but  they  have  many  other  activities. 
One  is  a  program  of  networking  with  students. 

Lage:      Like  a  mentorship  group? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   They  call  it  the  Blue  Network.   They  sponsor  the 

graduation  ceremony  for  the  mid-year  graduates,  and  also  offer 
career  advice  to  students.  It's  a  very  active  group,  and  very 
supportive  of  the  college. 

Lage:      Was  it  as  active  during  your  term  as  dean? 

Whinnery:   It  was  growing.   I  think  it  was  not  as  strong  as  it  is  now. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  a  newsletter  at  that  time,  a  means  of  communicating 
with  them? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   But  it  wasn't  as  formal  as  it  is  now. 

Lage:      And  did  you  have  someone  on  your  staff  who  took  care  of  alumni 
affairs? 


147 


Whinnery:   Yes.   There  wasn't  a  full-time  person  as  there  is  now. 
Eberhart  or  her  assistants  handled  the  matters. 

Lage:      The  ubiquitous  Frances  Eberhart. 
Whinnery:  Yes. 


Frances 


Community  Relations,  and  Fund  Raising 


Lage:      You  did  a  lot  of  community  relations,  too.   When  I  was  just 

leafing  quickly  through  your  papers,  I  saw  all  kinds  of  talks  at 
the  Berkeley  Women's  City  Club,  and  things  of  that  nature. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  think  most  deans  are  asked  to  do  things  like  that. 
Lage:      There's  an  interest  in  the  community  about  the  school. 
Whinnery:   Yes,  that's  right. 

Lage:      How  did  you  interpret  what  was  going  on  to  people  who  were  not 
engineers?  What  would  have  been  their  interest? 

Whinnery:   Many  people  recognized  that  engineering  was  having  an  impact  on 
their  lives.   One  of  the  problems  is  to  keep  these  talks  from 
getting  into  a  "Gee,  whiz,"  talk,  telling  them  all  the  wonderful 
things  that  are  going  to  happen  next  year.   Sometimes,  I'm 
afraid  that  they  did  end  up  a  little  bit  that  way.   Right  now, 
for  instance,  all  this  talk  in  the  papers  about  the 
communication  superhighway.   Well,  people  are  interested  in  it, 
but  some  aspects  get  exaggerated. 

Lage:      As  dean,  did  you  have  to  get  into  fund  raising? 

Whinnery:   No.   I'm  glad  you  raised  that  question,  because  that  is 

something  that  has  developed  very  much  since.   I  don't  know  what 
we  got  at  that  stage,  but  probably  at  most  a  few  thousand 
dollars  a  year,  and  even  that  was  almost  by  chance.   There  may 
have  been  larger  amounts  left  in  wills  for  scholarships  or  other 
specific  purposes,  but  very  little  discretionary  money. 

Lage:      Most  of  the  money  came  through  the  regular  budgeting  process? 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   Fund  raising  developed  over  a  period  of  years, 
and  was  growing  during  Dean  Maslach's  period,  but  I  think  the 
major  breakthrough  was  in  getting  the  funding  of  the  Bechtel 
Center  when  Ernie  Kuh  was  dean. 


148 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 
Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


So  at  some  point  there  evolved  the  sense  that,  at  least  for 
buildings,  the  college  had  to  go  out  on  its  own? 

Yes.   And  following  that,  realizing  that  there  are  other 
essential  programs  that  the  university  doesn't  have  the  budget 
to  support. 

Are  these  research  programs  or  curriculum  programs? 

Well,  special  programs,  for  minorities,  for  example.   There  is 
government  money  for  such  programs,  of  course,  but  it  takes  seed 
money  to  get  them  started.   Money  is  also  needed  to  get  new 
faculty  started.   The  university  has  some  money  for  new  faculty, 
but  in  comparison  to  some  of  the  places  that  we're  bidding 
against,  it's  very  small.   The  Berkeley  Engineering  Fund  is 
quite  a  big  operation  now,  and  very  successful.   Its  report 
gives  other  examples  of  help  to  the  college. 

That  will  be  interesting  when  we  get  on  to  talking  with  future 
deans,  to  see  the  evolution  of  that  trend. 

Yes. 

But  after  you  were  dean,  haven't  you  been  called  upon  to  take 
part  in  some  of  this  fund  raising? 

I've  been  on  fund-raising  committees,  yes.   I'm  a  lousy  fund 
raiser.   I  hate  to  ask  people  for  money,  and  if  people  say  no  to 
me,  I  take  it  as  no.   The  really  successful  fund  raisers  don't. 

No.   They  come  at  it  from  a  different  angle.   Oh,  that's  hard. 
So  that  was  something  you  didn't  have  to  do. 

No.   Probably  should  have  done  more,  but  I  didn't.   I  think  it 
was  not  common  for  deans  at  that  stage. 

Yes.   Now  every  division  seems  to  have  its  own  newsletter  and 
its  own  outreach  to  alumni. 

Yes. 


The  College's  Self -Study  Program,  and  Retreat  at  Tahoe 


Lage:      You  had  mentioned  the  college's  self-study  project,  that  led  up 
to  a  retreat  at  Tahoe.   That  came  towards  the  end,  did  it  not? 


149 


Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   I  can't  remember  exactly  when  this  started,  but  I 

think  it  was  about  the  time  that  I  realized  that  I  was  not  going 
to  continue,  but  before  I  had  announced  it.   I  guess  I  was 
somewhat  dissatisfied  in  seeing  all  of  the  things  that  O'Brien 
had  accomplished,  and  I  didn't  feel  I  had  done  anything  that 
constructive. 

Lage:      Of  course,  he'd  been  here  a  bit  longer. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   But  anyway,  feeling  a  bit  frustrated,  and  not  knowing 
exactly  what  directions  we  should  take,  it  seemed  time  for  a 
self -study  program.   I  appointed  a  committee;  the  first 
committee  didn't  accomplish  very  much. 

Then,  George  Maslach  took  it  over  and  did  a  very  fine  job. 
I  believe  that  had  something  to  do  with  his  being  asked  to  be 
acting  dean  first  and  then  dean.   Of  course,  he  also  had  done  a 
very  good  job  in  working  with  Earl  Parker  in  the  Institute  of 
Engineering  Research,  and  as  chairman  of  the  aeroscience 
division  of  mechanical  engineering.   At  that  time,  there  were 
all-university  meetings  every  year  that  Sproul  started  and  Kerr 
carried  on.   A  topic  would  be  chosen  and  subcommittees  appointed 
to  write  up  papers  on  specific  issues.   Then  these  papers  would 
be  distributed  to  the  hundred  or  so  invitees,  and  they'd  spend-- 
I  think  it  was  typically—two  days  arguing  about  them,  and  then 
make  certain  resolutions,  which  the  president  took  quite 
seriously.   In  fact,  the  first  thing  he  did  each  year  was  to 
report  on  what  had  been  done  about  the  resolutions  that  had  been 
passed  the  year  before. 

Lage:      That's  a  nice  way  to  begin. 

Whinnery:   So  anyway,  George  used  this  pattern,  set  up  some  study 
committees,  and  did  a  very  effective  job. 

Lage:      Were  you  looking  at  things  like  we've  been  talking  about,  the 
curriculum  and  faculty  hiring  and--? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   We  should  get  out  the  report,  I  guess,  and  look  at  it. 
But  there  were  discussions  on  curriculum,  facilities,  and 
hiring,  organization. 

Lage:      Sort  of  looking  at  what's  been  done  and  what  was  coming. 

Whinnery:   That's  right.   The  meeting  was  held  at  Tahoe  in  the  year  that  he 
was  acting  dean. 


Lage: 


Were  you  here,  or  were  you  on  sabbatical? 


150 


Whinnery:   I  was  in  New  Jersey,  but  they  invited  me  back,  and  I  was  present 
at  the  meeting. 

Lage:      Was  that  a  good  occasion? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  it  was  a  fine  occasion.   I  guess  we'd  have  to  look  at  the 

report  to  see  whether  it  really  changed  direction  of  the  college 
in  any  way.   It  was  certainly  useful,  among  other  things,  in 
getting  people  in  different  departments  together,  which  doesn't 
happen  often  enough. 

Lage:  The  other  thing  that  strikes  me  about  it  is  that  it  was  a  real 
change  from  O'Brien's  style,  kind  of  the  one-man  style,  versus 
all  of  this  involvement  of  the  faculty. 

Whinnery:   Of  course,  again,  in  fairness  to  O'Brien,  he  was  a  very  strong 
person,  and  he  injected  ideas.   But  he  worked  through  the 
faculty  committees. 

Lage:       So  is  it  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  was  a  one-man  operation? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   It  was  a  lot  more  than  one,  and  particularly  as  he  began 
to  get  a  strong  faculty.   He  was  much  more  autocratic  in  the 
early  stages  when  he  didn't  have  much  confidence  in  the  faculty, 
but  as  the  faculty  developed,  more  and  more  decision  making  was 
done  through  the  faculty  committees. 

Lage:      I'm  glad  we've  had  a  chance  to  talk  about  O'Brien,  because  I 

think  it's  good  to  get  your  reflections  on  him.  I  know  you've 
written  about  him,  but  it's  coming  out  more  in  this  interview, 
his  contributions  and  style. 

Whinnery:   Well,  he  certainly  is  responsible  for  the  major  growth  of  the 
college.   He  was  a  very  strong  dean,  but  not  an  absolutely 
autocratic  dean. 

Lage:      That  kind  of  leadership  seems  not  to  be  the  style  of  leadership 
we  have  now. 

Whinnery:   No,  nor  do  I  think  it  would  work  right  now.   Once  you  have  a 

strong  and  effective  faculty,  I  don't  think  that  would  work  as 
well.   You  asked  once  before  why  he  left,  and  I  think  part  of  it 
was  his  recognition  that  with  the  kind  of  leadership  that  he 
had,  he'd  accomplished  what  he  wanted  to  do,  and  the  college  was 
turning  over  to  more  of  a  collegiate  operation. 


151 


Engineering  Programs  within  UC  Extension 


Lage:      Did  you  have  anything  to  do  with  UC  Extension  engineering 
programs,  or  would  you  have  anything  to  say  about  that? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes,  that's  something  that  we  should  talk  about.   One  of  our 
assistant  deans,  Joe  [W.  ]  Kelly,  was  the  person  that  was  the 
liaison  with  Engineering  Extension,  and  it  was  a  very  good 
program.   We  had  to  review  course  proposals  and  qualifications 
of  the  various  instructors  that  took  part  in  it.   The  major 
related  issue  that  came  up  during  my  period  was  that  the 
electronics  industry  on  the  peninsula  wanted  a  master's  degree 
program  centered  there.   There  was  a  lot  of  debate  about  it. 
That  was  one  of  the  things  the  Academic  Senate  had  to  approve, 
and  there  were  a  number  of  restrictions  that  they  put  on  it. 
One  of  the  major  ones,  and  one  we  agreed  with,  was  that  no 
student  would  be  able  to  get  a  degree  from  Berkeley  without 
spending  at  least  a  term  on  the  campus. 


Whinnery:   The  industry  association  that  requested  this  program,  Western 
Electronics  Manufacturer's  Association,  WEMA,  wasn't  too  happy 
with  that  restriction.   But  anyway,  we  decided  to  start  on  that 
basis.   We  started  with  good  instructors  from  our  own  faculty, 
but  it  was  difficult  service  because  of  the  travel.   So  the 
program  didn't  survive  in  that  form. 

One  problem  was  that  we  were  competing  with  Stanford  on  its 
home  ground.   By  that  time,  Stanford  was  moving  into  the 
television  program  in  a  big  way,  so  the  students  could  take  many 
of  their  courses  by  television  at  their  own  industrial  site,  and 
the  instructors  could  teach  from  their  home  campus. 

Lage:      So  that  was  the  way  Stanford  designed  their  extension  program? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  for  their  M.S.  program  with  industry.   Our  television 
program  came  somewhat  later.   George  Maslach  pioneered  that. 

Lage:      Apparently,  there  was  some  conflict  with  Santa  Cruz  also. 
Whinnery:   That  came  later.   Santa  Cruz  was  established  in  1961. 

Lage:      That  was  a  later  time.   Did  this  kind  of  program  benefit  the 

.college  in  some  way,  or  was  it  as  you  said,  more  of  a  service? 

Whinnery:   We  thought  of  it  as  service.   Of  course  we  wanted  to  cooperate 

with  the  industries,  but  it  was  not  clear  that  this  was  the  best 


152 


way.   It  was  extra  work  for  a  very  hard-working  faculty, 
particularly  with  commute  time  involved- - 

Lage:      And  curriculum  development,  I'm  sure,  was  involved. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   And  another  issue  concerned  the  number  of  courses  that 
could  be  given.   If  there  aren't  enough,  there's  not  enough 
breadth  for  persons  with  different  interests.   In  contrast  to 
this  type  of  degree  program,  I  think  extension  is  set  up  to  give 
a  broad  range  of  courses. 

Lage:      Today  I'm  presenting  [former  UC  Extension  dean]  Milton  Stern 
with  his  oral  history  interview.   He  discussed  this  same 
program.   I  think  extension  had  to  move  up  the  peninsula  to 
leave  Santa  Cruz  its  territory,  so  they  offer  courses  from  Menlo 
Park  or  thereabouts. 


Selection  of  Lotfi  Zadeh  as  Chair  of  Electrical  Engineering 


Whinnery:   One  of  the  things  I  thought  we  should  talk  about  was  the  choice 
of  the  chair  of  electrical  engineering  near  the  end  of  the  time 
I  was  dean.   Bob  Saunders  was  the  chair  at  that  point,  and  I 
thought  he  had  done  a  very  good  job  in  continuing  the  building 
of  the  department.   As  you  know,  he  went  on  to  initiate  the 
engineering  program  at  UC  Irvine.   But  as  the  time  for  selection 
of  the  next  chair  approached,  there  was  an  unusual  amount  of 
political  activity  with  discussion  concerning  directions  of  the 
department,  some  of  it  pretty  intense. 

Lage:      Were  the  disagreements  in  the  area  of  faculty  hiring? 

Whinnery:   No.   I  don't  recall  any  major  disagreements  on  hiring. 

Certainly  some  very  good  people  were  appointed  during  that 
period.   The  emphasis  seemed  to  be  on  the  curriculum.   We 
reviewed  the  curriculum  in  department  meetings  every  spring,  and 
often  made  changes,  but  there  were  arguments  for  a  much  more 
radical  restructuring.   In  view  of  the  fact  that  there  were 
major  changes  a  few  years  later,  resulting  in  a  curriculum  with 
more  free  electives  than  in  any  other  EE  program  we  know  of, 
this  preliminary  discussion  may  have  been  useful. 

The  two  leading  candidates  were  Lotfi  Zadeh  and  Vic 
[Victor]  Rumsey,  both  outstanding  people  in  their  fields. 

Lage:      What  were  their  fields? 

Whinnery:   Lotfi  was  systems  theory,  and  one  who  saw  the  increasing 

importance  of  computers.   We've  talked  a  bit  about  the  early 


153 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


build-up  of  computers  through  Paul  Morton,  and  the  difficulties 
of  keeping  this  strong.   But  Lotfi  saw  pretty  clearly  the  role 
of  electrical  engineering  in  this  trend. 

Vic  Rumsey  was  an  expert  in  electromagnetic  theory  in 
general,  and  antennas  in  particular.   He  went  on  from  here  to 
San  Diego,  and  was  head  of  one  of  the  colleges  at  UC  San  Diego. 
So  they  were  both  very  fine  persons.   In  the  vote  it  was  nearly 
equal,  with  an  edge  toward  Lotfi.   Lotfi  had  complicated  things 
by  saying  he  didn't  want  to  be  chairman,  so  I  talked  with  a 
number  of  people  as  to  what  to  do  about  this.   They  felt  that  he 
should  at  least  be  asked. 

He  did  accept.   It  turned  out  that  he  also  was  a  somewhat 
controversial  chair.   He  had  very  strong  opinions  on  the  way 
things  should  go,  and  he  wouldn't  take  no  for  an  answer.   If  you 
didn't  agree  with  him,  he  would  come  back  and  argue  with  you  for 
hours.   But  I  think  the  important  thing  was  his  view  of  the  key 
role  of  computers,  and  the  fact  that  electrical  engineering  had 
to  be  a  part  of  this.   I  wasn't  in  on  it  when  computer  science 
left  electrical  engineering  to  go  to  the  College  of  Letters  and 
Science  and  then  eventually  came  back,  but  even  during  the 
period  when  there  was  a  separate  department,  he  had  effected  the 
name  change  to  Electrical  Engineering  and  Computer  Sciences, 
just  to  show  that  we  still  had  to  be  active  in  that  area. 

Even  when  the  program  had  transferred  over  to  Letters  and 
Science? 

Yes.   No  one  thought  he  would  be  successful  in  this,  but  he's  a 
very  expert  politician  and  was  able  to  obtain  the  name  change. 

Was  the  name  change  controversial  within  the  department? 

Yes,  it  was  controversial  within  the  department  and  without,  but 
I  think  it  was  very  important  in  the  end. 

When  the  computer  sciences  program  went  to  L  &  S,  was  it  an 
action  of  the  group  of  professors,  or  was  it  an  action  from 
higher  up? 

It  was  probably  a  combination.   In  addition  to  the  people  from 
this  department  that  formed  the  department  in  Letters  and 
Science,  there  were  people  from  mathematics  and  some  hired  from 
the  outside,  so  it  wasn't  just  made  up  of  persons  leaving 
electrical  engineering.   I  don't  know  the  details  on  who  made 
the  proposal  to  the  administration  for  the  separate  department. 


154 


Lage:      You  mentioned  the  vote  for  the  chairman.   How  does  this  take 
place?   Is  there  preparation  before  the  vote? 

Whinnery:   As  I  recall,  the  directive  at  the  time  I  was  dean  only  said, 
"The  faculty  should  be  consulted."  As  I  mentioned,  my  first 
consultation  was  carried  out  individually,  which  provided  more 
chance  for  discussion  of  the  choices,  but  was  also  subject  to 
misinterpretation.   So  later  surveys  were  carried  out  in  written 
form,  and  still  are. 

Lage:      But  I'm  assuming  that  there's  no  formal  process  where  a 

candidate  expresses  their  view  of  where  the  department  should 
go. 

Whinnery:   Some  of  the  people  wrote  memos  along  with  their  vote,  and  they 
were  helpful. 

Lage:      How  carefully  do  you  look,  when  you're  choosing  somebody,  at 
their  personality  or  their  political  abilities? 

Whinnery:   I  think  personality,  in  the  sense  of  getting  along  with  people, 
is  terribly  important.   When  you  say  political  abilities,  I 
think  it  was  a  surprise  to  most  people  to  find  Lotfi  as 
political  as  he  was.   I'm  not  putting  this  in  a  negative 
context.   He  was  very  effective  in  getting  things  done.   So  I 
would  say  it's  more  administrative  capabilities  that  you  look 
for,  but  some  of  that  is  political. 

Lage:      One  thing  I  have  heard  from  talking  to  various  people  is  what  a 
good  feeling  there  is  in  the  Department  of  Electrical 
Engineering,  what  a  sense  of  collegiality .   Has  that  continued 
through  all  the  different  chairmen? 

Whinnery:  Yes.  There  have  been  disagreements,  and  some  of  the  discussions 
of  these  became  rather  tense,  but  the  long-term  collegiality  and 
respect  for  each  other's  opinions  seems  to  me  to  have  continued. 

Lage:      Which  really  must  make  it  a  nice  place  to  work. 
Whinnery:   Yes,  it  does. 


Building  Up  Other  Campuses  with  Berkeley  Professors 


Lage:      You  mentioned  just  in  passing  several  professors  that  went  to 
other  campuses:   one  to  Irvine,  one  to  San  Diego.   In  the 


155 


building  up  of  the  new  campuses,  did  this  college  ever  feel  sort 
of  robbed? 

Whinnery:   No,  I  don't  think  so.   I  think,  in  general,  for  persons  who  go 
on  to  more  effective  positions,  you  may  miss  them,  but  at  the 
same  time  it's  part  of  the  contribution  to  education  in  general. 
That  includes  not  only  the  ones  to  other  campuses  of  UC,  but 
persons  like  Everhart  going  on  to  Cornell,  Illinois,  and 
Caltech;  and  Henry  [C.]  Bourne  [Jr.]  was  another  who  was  at 
Georgia  Tech  and  later  NSF. 

Lage:      So  it's  part  of  the  pattern. 
Whinnery:   Part  of  the  process. 

Lage:      I  have  heard  in  other  fields  some  feeling  that  the  new  campuses 
were  a  drain  on  the  talent  pool. 

Whinnery:   No,  I  don't  think  so. 

Lage:      Maybe  you  had  a  big  enough  talent  pool. 

Whinnery:   That  helped.   Of  course,  if  you  get  an  exodus  of  everybody  in 

one  field,  or  departures  because  they're  really  unhappy  with  the 
situation,  that's  something  else  again.  But  if  they  see  this  as 
an  opportunity  to  contribute  more,  why,  more  power  to  them. 

Lage:      Right.   And  then  you  still  have  some  connection,  I  would  think, 
with  their  roots  at  Berkeley. 

Whinnery:   Sure. 


Leaving  the  Deanship 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Tell  a  little  bit  about  how  you  left  the  deanship. 
like  you  had  trouble  getting  out  of  it. 


It  sounded 


I  think  Ed  Strong  was  not  very  happy  when  I  told  him  of  my 
decision.   He  didn't  know  about  the  agreement  with  Seaborg  until 
I  showed  him  the  letter.   As  I  think  I  mentioned  before,  one  of 
the  smartest  things  I  did  was  to  get  it  written  down  when 
Seaborg  asked  me  to  serve  for  two  or  three  years,  and  by  that 
time  I'd  been  dean  for  four.   But  Strong  didn't  put  any  pressure 
on  me  to  stay. 

Lage:      Didn't  it  take  a  while,  though,  to  get  your  successor  appointed? 


156 


Whinnery:   George  was  made  acting  dean  at  first.   But  I  believe  I  left  at 
the  time  I  requested.  The  thing  that  I  had  realized  is  that  if 
I  stayed  very  much  longer,  I  could  never  go  back  to  technical 
work,  and  it  was  even  chancy  at  that  stage.   Counting  ERL, 
service  as  chair  of  the  department,  and  the  demanding  four  years 
as  dean,  I  had  been  in  administration  for  ten  years. 

Lage:      Were  you  able  to  keep  up  any  research  and  teaching  during  the 
deanship? 

Whinnery:   Don  Pederson  and  I  developed  and  taught  the  new  electronics 
course  that  I  mentioned,  Engineering  17. 

Lage:      The  lower  division  course. 

Whinnery:   And  I  think  I  did  some  other  teaching,  which,  looking  back  on 

it,  may  have  been  a  mistake.   It  may  have  been  more  important  to 
do  what  some  of  the  other  deans  have  done,  to  save  some  time  to 
keep  up  with  their  research.   I  had  some  graduate  students 
finishing.   One  in  particular,  Marty  Pollack,  now  at  Bell 
Laboratories,  head  of  a  department  and  very  successful,  was 
doing  most  of  his  work  during  that  period.   The  difficulties  in 
setting  up  meetings  to  discuss  matters  with  him  was  part  of  the 
reason  that  I  realized  this  pattern  wasn't  working.   There  are 
some  deans  in  other  schools  that  claim  they  save  half  of  their 
time  for  research,  but  I  don't  see  how  they  do  it. 

I  also  realized  that  I  couldn't  really  get  back  to  research 
without  a  break  of  some  sort,  and  that  prompted  the  decision  to 
go  to  Bell  Laboratories.   I'd  had  an  open  invitation  to  go  there 
for  years. 

Lage:      So  this  was  the  way  to  immerse  yourself  again. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      We'll  get  to  that  later  [Chapter  IX]. 

Whinnery:   I  don't  remember  anyone  giving  me  any  difficulty  over  the 

decision  to  leave.   I  think  some  were  surprised.   And  I  wouldn't 
blame  them  for  thinking  it  a  little  unfair  to  the  college,  that 
they  had  to  go  through  this  [laughs]  painful  business  of  setting 
up  a  search  committee  so  soon  again.   But  no  one  gave  me  a  hard 
time  over  it. 

Lage:      Well,  I  should  hope  not.   Four  years  of  your  life  seems  like 
plenty  for  such  an  all-encompassing  task  as  that. 


157 


Whinnery:   As  I  said  once  before,  I  certainly  enjoyed  many  aspects  of  it, 
particularly  the  people  I  got  to  know  in  other  departments,  and 
realizing  what  a  fine  faculty  we  had  across  the  board.   And  then 
the  opportunities  outside.   This  prestigious  position  opened  up 
avenues  all  over  the  country.   A  lot  of  those  were  very 
interesting. 


Commission  on  Engineering  Education 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Now,  we  haven't  talked  about  that  much. 

Yes.   I  think  we  could  make  it  brief,  but  you  said  you  wanted  to 
talk  about  some  of  the  committees.   I  don't  think  there's  a  lot 
to  be  said  about  many  of  them;  two  or  three  are  probably  the 
most  important.   I  would  like  to  say  some  things  about  the 
Commission  on  Engineering  Education,  and  its  educational 
experiments . 

And  that  was  with  other  university  deans  of  engineering? 

They  weren't  necessarily  deans.   It  started  with  a  National 
Science  Foundation  [NSF]  conference  in  Boulder,  Colorado,  a 
week-long  conference  on,  "Where  is  engineering  education  going?" 
These  go  on  regularly—there  must  be  half  a  dozen  of  them  this 
year—but  that  was  a  rather  special  one.   I  was  not  on  the 
planning  committee,  but  it  was  a  very  good  one.   Very 
stimulating  and  exciting  ideas  were  presented  to  us. 

I  think  the  NSF  members  were  as  surprised  as  anyone  when, 
at  the  end,  the  attendees  asked  NSF  to  set  up  a  permanent  body 
to  carry  out  some  of  the  suggested  experiments.   Again,  I  wasn't 
involved  in  that,  but  the  negotiations  went  on,  and  the 
Commission  on  Engineering  Education  was  set  up.   Eventually,  I 


became  one  of  the  chairpersons  of  it. 
educational  experiments  going  on. 


It  had  a  whole  lot  of 


It  would  support  experimental  programs  on  different  campuses? 

It  was  very  wide-ranging.   It  was  concerned  with  computer- 
assisted  instruction,  televised  instruction.   The  programs  in 
the  high  schools,  the  so-called  Man-Made  World  project.   Ed 
David  and  John  Truxal  were  the  leaders  for  that.   There  were 
inter-university  cooperative  programs;  the  one  between  Colorado 
and  Illinois  was  the  most  successful  of  these,  the  so-called 
Build  program.   Educational  films--just  dozens  of  projects,  some 
successful  and  some  not. 


158 


Even  the  programs  which  were  successful  at  the  time  did  not 
necessarily  survive  in  their  original  forms  but  did  provide 
excitement  and  an  opportunity  for  critical  examination,  which 
played  a  part  in  the  continuing  evolution  of  engineering 
programs.   For  that  reason  I  think  such  experiments  need  to  be 
done  regularly. 

Lage:  When  you  were  chairperson,  did  you  bring  any  particular  point  of 
view  or  ideas  in,  do  you  remember?  Did  you  have  a  pet  project? 

Whinnery:   I  didn't  revolutionize  anything.   The  commission  had  been  going 
on  for  several  years  by  that  time  and  had  a  fairly  full  agenda. 
One  of  the  big  problems  was  fund  raising.   In  addition  to  the 
continuing  NSF  support,  we  had  support  from  the  [Alfred  P.] 
Sloan  Foundation,  [Charles  F.)  Kettering  Foundation,  and  others 
for  specific  projects.   But  each  new  idea  required  a  new  source 
of  funds. 

Lage:      Was  there  a  staff  for  the  commission? 

Whinnery:  Yes,  and  a  very  good  executive  director,  Newman  Hall.  So  it  was 
more  like  a  university  committee  in  which  everybody  put  in  ideas 
and  then  decided  what  to  do  next.  The  staff  kept  things  moving. 

Lage:       It's  impressive  that  so  many  engineers  are  committed  to 
improving  engineering  education. 

Whinnery:   Well,  they  still  are.   But  every  so  often  in  my  talks  about 
engineering  education,  I  bring  up  this  model  and  try  to  get 
people  to  look  at  what  was  done,  but  nobody  seems  to  be  that 
interested  in  past  history.   I  think  there  are  some  lessons  that 
could  be  learned.   In  particular,  the  desire  to  still  do  more 
with  the  high  schools,  motivating  students  toward  science  and 
technical  careers.   I  think  the  success  for  several  years  of  the 
Man-Made  World  project  was  tremendous,  but  most  people  who  want 
to  work  with  the  high  schools  don't  even  know  about  it. 

Lage:      So  they  reinvent  the  wheel.   That  happens  a  lot. 

Whinnery:   Another  project  was  concerned  with  CAI,  Computer-Assisted 

Instruction.   That  has  gone  far  beyond  what  we  were  trying  to  do 
at  the  time.   Computers  were  primitive,  especially  in  their 
storage  and  display  capabilities.   But  the  early  experiments 
were  important  in  getting  things  started.   Similarly  with 
instructional  television.   Our  role  was.  primarily  in  conducting 
a  technology  assessment  of  the  medium,  with  only  a  small  part  in 
its  development.   But  it  was  pretty  exciting  at  the  time. 


159 


The  Course  of  the  College  Since  1963 


Lage:      I  hate  broad  questions  like,  "Do  you  have  any  reflections  on  the 
course  of  the  college  since  your  deanship?",  but  is  there 
anything  that  you'd  want  to  say  about  leadership  or  changes  in 
direction  since  that  time? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  I  think  it's  continued  to  develop.   I  certainly  don't  have 
any  criticism.   I  think  each  of  the  deans  has  carried  on  the 
development.   One  of  the  things  I  do  admire  is  their  ability  to 
raise  funds.   But  it's  not  just  fund  raising;  it  is  the  improved 
interactions  with  the  community.   The  important  industrial 
liaison  program  will  take  place  next  week-- 

Lage:      Here  on  campus? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  whole  college  takes  part  and  there  will  be  hundreds  of 
visitors  from  industries  all  over  the  world. 


Lage:      For  seminars  and  the  like? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  main  points  will  be  to  present  research  of  the 

college.   Somewhere  I  had  the  program  for  the  departments,  but 
here  is  the  research  summary  for  EECS .   [pulls  out  summary] 

Lage:      Oh,  my,  this  is  an  impressive  volume  here.   We're  looking  at 
"Research  Summary,  1994."  An  inch  and  a  half  thick,  just  for 
the  department? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   EECS  and  ERL.   The  Industrial  Liaison  Program  is  for  the 
whole  college.   It  starts  off  with  a  plenary  session  in  the 
student  union,  and  then  breaks  up  into  departmental  programs. 
There  are  luncheon  speakers;  they  used  to  have  a  dinner, 
literally  filling  the  Pauley  Ballroom,  but  it's  not  scheduled 
this  year. 

Lage:      Is  this  a  yearly  event? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Part  of  the  purpose  is  fund  raising.   But  even  more  than 

the  money  is  the  interaction,  the  participation  of  our  students, 
the  cooperative  research  programs  that  often  come  out  of  this, 
and  the  knowledge  of  the  prestige  of  the  college.   Ernie  Kuh 
started  the  first  of  these. 

So  I  think  that  each  of  the  deans  has  done  a  tremendous 
job,  and  the  college  has  continued  to  develop.   Of  course,  Dave 
Hodges  has  to  face  difficult  budget  cuts  but  still  has  plans  for 
new  programs  —  especially  in  the  interdisciplinary  area. 


160 


VIII   POST- 1963  UNIVERSITY  SERVICE 


Chairman,  University  Four-Letter  Word  Committee 


Lage:      Our  next  topic  is  some  of  your  university  service  during  the 

sixties  and  seventies.   I  don't  think  we  need  a  lot  of  detail. 
I'm  particularly  interested  in  your  coming  back  to  all  the 
student  unrest  and  turbulence  on  campus  after  your  leave  at  Bell 
Labs,  and  how  it  struck  you,  and  what  role  you  played. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   One  of  the  most  difficult  assignments  I  had  was  that  of 
chairman  of  the  four-letter  word  committee. 

Lage:      Oh,  is  that  what  you  were  chairman  of?   [laughing]   I  ran  across 
a  quote  from  a  letter--!  think  maybe  you  were  writing  to 
Seaborg--"That  was  a  horrible  experience  and  one  impossible  to 
handle  really  well,  but  it's  over."1  That  must  have  been  what 
you  were  referring  to,  because  it  was  in  the  spring  of  '65. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      So  you  chaired  the  committee  that  dealt  with  four-letter  words? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Which  sounds  so  silly  now:   you  can  go  to  any  movie  and 
hear  all  of  them.   But  it  really  was  a  crisis  for  the 
university.   It  was  impossible  to  handle  it  well,  because  here 
we  were,  a  fine  faculty  committee,  and  fortunately,  we  had  two 
persons  from  the  law  school  on  it,  Ron  Degnan  and  Sho  Sato. 
These  were  needed  because  the  students  wouldn't  talk  to  us.   We 
could  only  deal  with  their  lawyer.   The  whole  idea  of  a  faculty 
committee  was  to  try  to  understand  the  students'  motives.   And 
it  was  also  difficult  to  find  exactly  what  happened  in  spite  of 


'In  Whinnery  papers,  Bancroft  Library. 


161 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


the  fact  that  thousands  of  people  were  in  Sproul  Plaza  when  this 
happened. 


I'm  trying  to  think  of  what  the  actual  incident  was. 
using  four-letter  words  over  the  loudspeaker? 


It  was 


Yes,  [Arthur]  Goldberg  in  particular.   There  was  no  question 
about  what  he  said  over  the  loudspeaker.   He  also  had  a  number 
of  other  people  leading  a  cheer,  and  another  young  student  —  the 
one  I  felt  sorriest  for—holding  a  placard  with  the  famous  word 
on  it.   The  fourth  incident  was  reading  Lady  Chatterley's  Lover 
to  the  staff  in  Sproul  Hall,  who  were  asking  the  reader  to  quit. 

The  sad  part  about  it  was  that  the  students  wouldn't  talk 
to  us  about  their  motivation.   Most  of  the  actions  we  took  were 
not  terribly  severe,  but  they  claimed  afterwards  that  they  lost 
scholarships.   If  that  was  an  issue,  we  would  have  hoped  they 
would  have  discussed  it  with  us.   But  here  we  were,  dealing  with 
lawyers,  and  the  university's  lawyer  was  just  as  bad  as  their 
lawyer.   He  would  say,  "Why  don't  you  throw  the  so-and-so's 
out?"   [laughter]   He  would  say,  "There's  no  presumption  of 
innocence  here."  We  would  say,  "Wait  a  minute,  look  at  the 
catalogue.   It  says  under  student  conduct  that  the  student  is 
assumed  to  be  in  good  conduct  until  shown  otherwise." 

Were  there  clear  rules?   Had  there  actually  been  rules  —  time, 
place,  and  manner  rules? 

The  rules  were  somewhat  vague  in  that  they  talked  about  good 
conduct,  and  the  issue  was  whether  this  was  good  conduct  or  not. 
It  has  to  be  seen  in  the  period  in  which  it  occurred,  and  the 
public's  very  negative  reaction.   But  the  sad  part  was  that  it 
was  not  the  way  a  student-faculty  discussion  of  conduct  should 
have  been  carried  on. 


Do  you  remember  what  kind  of  penalties  there  were? 
suspended  for  a  time? 


Were  they 


Mostly  probation  for  various  periods.   With  the  case  of 
Goldberg,  it  was  a  dismissal.   Even  there,  he  had  an  opportunity 
to  appeal  it,  which  as  far  as  I  know  he  didn't.   He  went  on,  I 
think,  to  Howard  University. 

So  for  the  most  part  they  weren't,  in  the  eyes  of  the 
committee  at  least,  very  severe.   Fortunately  for  the 
university,  the  public  thought  they  were,  and  they'd  been  dealt 
with,  and  that  got  the  crisis  out  of  the  way. 


162 

Lage:      Did  you  have  any  campus  administrators  feeding  in  their  points 
of  view  to  you,  or  was  this  really  an  independent  committee? 

Whinnery:   No.   The  administration  was  very,  very  concerned.   And  the 
hearings  took  quite  a  while  because  of  the  problems  of 
scheduling  and  the  difficulties  with  the  lawyers.   But  the 
acting  chancellor-- 

Lage:      [Martin]  Meyerson. 

Whinnery:   Meyerson.   He  was  very  anxious  to  get  our  report,  but  didn't  put 
any  pressure  on  us  on  how  we  handled  the  hearings. 


The  Continuing  Turbulence  of  the  Late  Sixties  and  Seventies 


Lage:  Was  it  kind  of  a  shock  to  you,  to  come  back  to--you  left  a 
relatively  quiet  campus  and  came  back  to  one  that  was  very 
disrupted. 

Whinnery:   Certainly,  quite  apart  from  this  personal  experience,  it  was  a 

disturbing  time  because  the  Academic  Senate  was  holding  meetings 
almost  weekly- - 

Lage:      And  a  lot  of  division  on  the  campus. 

Whinnery:   And  a  lot  of  division  among  the  faculty.   I  must  say,  the  FSM 
[Free  Speech  Movement]  kept  things  under  control  in  large  part, 
and  tried  to  have  their  people  be  peaceful,  even  when  they  would 
have  sit-ins  to  disrupt  things,  but  there  were  individuals  that 
were  threatening  when  you  went  to  these  meetings. 

Lage:      Did  it  affect  the  engineering  side  of  campus  as  much  as  the  rest 
of  the  campus? 

Whinnery:   It  didn't  affect  things  until  much  later  in  the  bombing  of 

Cambodia.   The  engineers,  I  think  quite  properly,  thought  that 
was  terrible,  and  became  involved.   But  I  was  very  proud  of  them 
in  that  they  worked  through  legal  channels.   Professor  [Pravin 
P.]  Varaiya  in  the  department  was  advising  them,  and  everything 
they  did  was  by  the  rules,  handing  out  leaflets,  writing 
letters,  and  things  of  that  nature. 

Lage:      Because  there  were  student  strikes  and  a  number  of  incidents 
related  to  that. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 


163 


Lage:      Do  you  remember  the  Hart  Committee  on  Senate  Effectiveness?   You 
served  on  it  in  '65. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      What  did  that  deal  with? 

Whinnery:   It  changed  the  leadership  of  the  senate  and  established  a  system 
of  state-of-the-campus  messages.   I'm  not  sure  in  the  end  that 
it  had  a  major  effect  in  the  way  the  senate  operated,  but  at  the 
time,  it  seemed  an  advance. 

Lage:      I'm  sure  the  senate  was  drawn  on  in  ways  that  it  usually  hadn't 
been,  during  these  times  of  crisis,  like  the  loyalty  oath  and 
FSM.   Overall,  do  you  think  the  senate  functions  well  in  dealing 
with  crises  like  this? 

Whinnery:   I  think  that  even  though  that  was  very  cumbersome  and  painful, 
it  was  a  necessary  way  of  effecting  change.   Even  though 
Berkeley  had  the  national  headlines,  many  other  campuses  had 
much  worse  experiences  than  we  did,  with  more  disruption  to 
classes  and  more  physical  damage. 

Lage:      Well,  it  wasn't  just  FSM,  but  that  whole  period,  the  Vietnam  Day 
thing  and  third  world  students  strike-- 

Whinnery:   That's  right. 

Lage:      Chancellor  [Roger]  Heyns  came  in,  '65  to  '71.   Did  you  have  an 
opportunity  to  work  with  him? 

Whinnery:   Not  terribly  closely,  but  I  admired  him  very  much. 
II 

Whinnery:   He  had  a  lot  of  educational  vision  and  creative  ideas,  but  much 
of  his  time  had  to  be  spent  in  this  putting  out  fires.   I  saw 
him  just  the  other  day,  and  he  looks  fine.   He  said  that  he's 
enjoying  his  retirement  very  much. 

Lage:      To  come  from  off  the  campus,  completely  foreign  to  the  campus, 
and  to  be  plunked  down  in  the  middle  of  this  crisis  situation-- 
you  have  to  admire  him. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      Did  he  do  a  good  job  of  building  bridges  with,  say,  the  College 
of  Engineering,  do  you  remember? 


164 


Whinnery:   I  think  so.   Of  course,  George  Maslach  was  the  dean  at  that 
time.   But  certainly  my  impression  was  that  he  had  a  high 
respect  for  engineering.   He  actually  tried  to  talk  me  into 
coming  back  into  the  administration  at  one  stage. 

Lage:       In  what  capacity? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know.   This  was  after  I  had  returned  from  Bell  and  felt 
I  was  hanging  on  by  my  fingernails,  getting  back  to  technical 
work.   So  I  didn't  really  explore  the  offer.   I  suppose  it  would 
have  been  an  assistant  chancellor  or  vice  chancellor  or 
something  like  that. 

Lage:  Well,  that  was  a  road  not  taken. 

Whinnery:  That's  right. 

Lage:  Shall  we  end  on  that  note? 

Whinnery:  Yes. 


Appointment  to  UC  Santa  Cruz  Applied  Technology  Program,  1968 


[Interview  6:   March  16,  1994]  //// 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


You  took  some  time  and  went  to  UC  Santa  Cruz  in  1968. 
that  arrangement? 


What  was 


Actually,  I  was  going  to  transfer  there.   Lotfi  Zadeh,  the 
chairman,  instead  talked  me  into  just  going  on  a  year's  leave  to 
see  how  it  was.   I  guess  it  turned  out  to  be  very  fortunate. 
When  I  was  asked  to  go,  it  was  to  help  build  up  the  new  School 
of  Engineering  there. 

How  were  you  asked,  and  by  whom? 

By  Francis  Clauser.   He  had  been  brought  in  from  Caltech  to 
build  up  engineering  and  was  then  made  a  vice  chancellor,  so  he 
was  looking  for  someone  else  to  be  dean  of  engineering.   Well,  I 
didn't  want  to  be  dean-- 

You'd  done  that. 

--but  he  still  asked  me  to  come  and  help  him  in  building 
engineering. 


165 


Lage:      What  attracted  you  initially?   I'm  surprised  that  you  would 
consider  a  permanent  transfer. 

Whinnery:   It  was  the  Santa  Cruz  model  of  the  colleges,  which  were  supposed 
to  be  mixing  zones,  interdisciplinary,  between  different  fields. 
I  think  in  the  end  it  didn't  quite  turn  out  all  the  way  that 
[Dean  E.]  McHenry  had  in  mind.   But  it  was  a  very  exciting  idea. 
And  of  course,  Santa  Cruz  is  a  beautiful  place. 

Howard  Eberhart  from  civil  engineering,  and  then  Don 
Peterson  from  EE  had  helped  in  the  initial  planning  for  the 
school.   But  the  year  I  was  there,  we  accepted  students  in 
engineering  and  started  some  classes  and  also  looked  for  staff. 

Lage:      At  just  the  undergraduate  level,  is  that  right? 

Whinnery:  At  that  stage,  yes,  with  the  hope  that  it  would  eventually  be 
graduate. 

During  that  year,  Fred  Terraan  was  asked  to  make  a  study  of 
engineering  for  the  state  of  California.   He  concluded  that 
there  were  too  many  engineering  schools  and  recommended  the 
closure  of  both  Riverside,  which  was  also  starting  up,  and  Santa 
Cruz,  also  a  couple--! "ve  forgotten  which  they  were--in  the 
state  college  system.   And  they  did. 

Lage:      When  you  say  "they  did,"  was  this  the  legislature  or  the 
university  administration? 

Whinnery:  The  university  administration,  of  course,  for  the  university. 
And  I  guess  the  board  for  the  state  colleges  and  universities 
closed  at  least  one  of  their  programs. 

Lage:      Did  you  agree  with  that  assessment,  having  read  Terman's  report? 

Whinnery:   No.   First  of  all,  you  have  to  have  a  longer-term  view.   I  think 
at  the  time  he  probably  was  correct  in  saying  that  there  was  an 
oversupply  of  engineering  graduates.   The  economy  seems  to  go  up 
and  down  and  that  was  a  down  period.   But  in  the  long  term, 
we've  always  found  that  there  was  a  need  for  them.   The  other 
philosophical  point  is  that  a  general  campus  should  have  some 
professional  schools.   That  certainly  was  McHenry 's  view. 

But  the  other  thing  that  was  a  little  maddening  is  that 
some  of  Terman's  figures  were  a  little  bent--the  way  he  handled 
the  federal  support,  for  example.   He  made  it  look  like  Stanford 
was  the  most  economically-run  school,  by  excluding  federal 
support. 


166 


Incidentally,  Terman  was  a  great  person  and  deserves  credit 
for  the  buildup  of  electronics  in  this  area.   I  think  I 
mentioned  earlier  that  when  I  was  dean  he  came  to  congratulate 
me  and  give  me  some  very  good  advice,  which  I  very  much 
appreciated. 

Lage:      Yes,  I  think  you  did  mention  that. 

Whinnery:   In  any  event,  I  didn't  agree  with  the  report,  but  since  it  was 
carried  out,  it  was  well  that  I  was  on  leave  and  came  back  to 
Berkeley.   The  year  I  was  at  Santa  Cruz,  the  system  really 
worked  beautifully.   I  was  in  Crown  College,  and  its  theme  was 
science  and  engineering.   The  college  course  was  a  course  on 
history  and  impact  of  technology  in  America.   It  involved 
physical  scientists  and  social  scientists.   I  was  the  only 
engineer. 

Lage:      It  was  team-taught? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   One  person  who  was  an  expert  in  the  Industrial  Revolution 
gave  most  of  the  main  lectures.   Each  of  us  gave  one  or  two  main 
lectures,  but  then  we  handled  discussion  sections.   The  students 
were  excited  about  it,  and  it  was  a  lot  of  fun  working  with  the 
people  in  economics  and  chemistry  and  other  disciplines. 

Lage:      The  buildings  were  in  place  by  then,  the  Crown  College 
dormitories? 

Whinnery:   That  was  the  newest  college.   They  were  trying  to  open  one  a 
year.   They  were  then  building  the  fourth  college. 

Lage:      Did  you  move? 

Whinnery:   No,  actually.   We  put  our  house  up  for  sale  and  we  were  looking 
for  a  place  to  move  to,  but  I  guess  it  was  again  fortunate  first 
that  I  was  on  leave,  and  secondly  that  the  house  didn't  sell. 

Lage:      That  would  have  made  it  more  difficult,  wouldn't  it? 
Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:  That's  something  I  hadn't  known,  that  you  were  actually  thinking 
of  transferring.  Did  you  like  the  atmosphere  at  Santa  Cruz  when 
you  spent  time  there? 

Whinnery:   I  liked  very  much  the  role  of  Crown  College.   In  addition  to  the 
college  course,  I  gave  one  course  in  electronics  very  much  like 
the  one  Pederson  and  I  had  developed  here.   That  was  for 
engineering  majors  and  went  quite  well.   A  young  Ph.D.  from 


167 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 
Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Berkeley,  Sing  Lee,  worked  with  me  on  that.   He  is  now  on  the 
faculty  at  UC  San  Diego.   But  another  course  was  a  complete 
failure.   I  tried  to  use  the  Man-Made  World  concept  to  try  to 
give  a  technological  view  to  non-majors.   The  first  time  I  wrote 
the  simplest  three-term  equation  on  the  board—and  remember, 
everybody  had  had  algebra--half  the  class  got  up  and  walked  out. 
[laughter]   The  ones  that  remained  were  engineering  or  science 
students  and  the  material  was  probably  too  simple  for  them. 

Was  that  a  time  where  there  was  a  fair  amount  of  student  unrest 
down  at  Santa  Cruz? 


No.   It  was  new,  and  everybody  was  very  eager, 
fun  to  work  with  the  students. 


It  was  a  lot  of 


It's  an  exciting  time,  when  there's  something  new  and  with  so 


much  vision. 
McHenry? 


Did  you  have  a  good  relationship  with  Dean 


Oh,  sure.   I  didn't  see  him  a  lot,  but  he's  a  marvelous  person 
to  work  with.   Of  course,  he  had  this  vision.   At  that  time,  it 
was  working  very  well. 

One  of  the  other  great  things,  the  provost  of  Crown  College 
was  Kenneth  Thimann.   I'm  sure  he's  retired  now,  but  he  was  a 
marvelous  person.   I  couldn't  imagine  a  more  ideal  person  for 
that  position. 

I  know  they  have  a  building  named  after  him  now.   In  that  one 
year  the  program  was  stopped? 

Yes,  the  engineering  program. 

Did  the  majors  transfer  elsewhere? 

The  fortunate  thing  was  that  the  people  that  Clauser  had  hired 
were  computer  people.   Harry  Huskey  had  come  from  Berkeley,  and 
then  they'd  hired  a  couple  of  very  young,  bright  people,  one 
from  MIT,  one  from  Stanford.   They  remained  and  the  program 
continued  as  information  sciences. 


Lage: 
Whinnery:   Yes. 


Because  that  would  be  sad,  to  hire  people  away  from  other  jobs 
and  then  not  be  able  to  continue  the  program. 


168 


Return  to  Berkeley;  University  Professorship 


Whinnery:   Another  sequel  to  that  is  interesting.   When  I  came  back  here, 
Ernie  Kuh  was  chairman.   He  asked  me  to  give  the  course  which  I 
had  been  so  excited  about  in  Santa  Cruz,  the  impact  of 
technology  in  America.   It  was  not  a  success.   I  don't  know  how 
much  was  the  Santa  Cruz  atmosphere.   Of  course,  I  was  trying  to 
do  it  on  my  own,  whereas  there  we'd  had  a  team  of  people, 
including  people  who  knew  a  lot  more  than  I  about  sociology. 

Lage:      Was  that  given  by  the  engineering  college,  but  offered  to  other 
students  as  well? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  it  was  offered  to  others.   Again,  we  had  somewhat  the  same 
problem,  that  the  engineers  really  wanted  to  dig  in  to  some  one 
issue,  like  energy,  or  the  computer  effect  on  society,  and  the 
others  didn't  want  any  technical  talk  at  all. 

Lage:      So  the  two  cultures  maybe  are  more  divided  than  Snow  thought? 

Whinnery:   There  have  been  a  number  of  people  who  have  had  very  good 

successes  with  courses  such  as  these.   What  seems  to  work  is  to 
choose  a  topic  like  energy,  and  then  bring  in  the  social  aspects 
of  that.   Or  the  effect  of  computers  on  society. 

Lage:      Something  that  people  can  relate  to. 

Whinnery:  Yes.  So  I  think  that  is  probably  a  model  that  works.  I  don't 
think  the  course  I  described  survived  many  years  at  Santa  Cruz 
either. 

Lage:      The  other  question  I  had  was  about  your  university 

professorship.   What  does  that  involve?   I  know  it's  a 
tremendous  honor. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  it  certainly  is.   Like  a  lot  of  my  honors,  this  is  work  of 
a  lot  of  friends  making  the  nomination.   What  it  originally  was 
intended  to  be  was  a  program  in  which  a  professor  would  go  from 
campus  to  campus  and  be  available  to  all  of  the  campuses .   But 
first  of  all,  it's  very  difficult,  particularly  if  you  have  a 
laboratory  that  you  have  to  have  in  some  center.   But  even 
otherwise,  it  is  difficult  to  have  graduate  students  all  over 
the  state.   So  mostly  it  has  come  down  to  shorter-term  visits  on 
other  campuses,  and  to  be  honest,  some  of  the  university 
professors  don't  bother  with  traveling  at  all. 

I  discovered  this  when  I  was  named  and  talked  to  quite  a 
few  to  see  what  the  expectations  were.   It's  interesting;  there 


169 


were  two  letters.   One  said  we  were  "expected"  to  spend  time  on 
other  campuses,  and  the  other  one  said  we  were  "encouraged." 
[laughter]   It  turns  out  that  "encouraged"  is  the  operative 
word.   I  learned  that  some  would  say,  "Well,  sure,  I'd  give  a 
lecture  on  another  campus."  That  was  something  I  would  do 
anyway,  so  it  really  hasn't  made  a  difference.   Others  took  it 
very  seriously.   Josephine  Miles  was  one.   Neil  Smelser  was 
another. 

Lage:      Would  these  people  and  yourself  initiate  ideas  for  other 
campuses,  or  would  you  just  wait  to  be  invited? 

Whinnery:   A  little  of  both.   I  think  in  my  case,  I  had  invitations  from 

all  the  campuses  that  had  engineering.   The  typical  request  was 
for  a  one-week  stay  to  give  a  series  of  lectures.   For  San 
Diego,  I  took  a  sabbatical  for  one  term.   You'd  also  be  asked  to 
be  on  either  appointment  or  review  committees  of  other  campuses. 
You  might  have  been  asked  on  those  anyway,  but  some  certainly 
came  from  the  university  professorship. 

But  it's  bothered  me  that  the  university,  if  serious  about 
it,  could  do  more  to  encourage  these  activities.   They  have  a 
small  fund  to  help  with  travel  but  don't  seem  to  encourage  use 
of  that  fund.   One  of  the  problems  is  that,  if  you  go  away  for 
long,  your  home  department  has  to  worry  about  covering  the 
teaching. 

Lage:      There  isn't  automatic  university-wide  funding  for  the  university 
professorship? 

Whinnery:   Only  the  small  fund  for  travel.   I  guess  it  still  exists.   I 
haven't  used  it  for  several  years.   But  the  budget  committee 
several  times  has  made  a  recommendation  that  the  home  department 
should  have  a  fund  for  replacement  to  encourage  this.   I  guess 
right  now  there  are  more  important  issues.   There  is  a  review 
going  on  now  about  possible  changes.   There  was  one  proposal 
that  it  only  be  honorary,  but  the  last  I  heard  they  were  going 
to  leave  in  some  word  of  encouragement  for  time  on  other 
campuses . 

Lage:      Does  it  relieve  you  of  any  duties  within  your  home  department? 

Whinnery:   Not  automatically.   But  my  department  was  very  cooperative  in 

making  arrangements  to  cover  courses  when  I  was  invited  to  other 
campuses . 

Lage:      So  you  must  have  a  really  good  fix  on  engineering  throughout  the 
university  system? 


170 


Whinnery:   When  I  was  active  I  had  a  pretty  good  overview  and  was  impressed 
by  most  of  the  programs.   When  Dave  Saxon  was  president,  he 
asked  that  we  write  him  a  memo  and  give  our  impressions  of  the 
programs  that  we  saw  on  these  visits. 

Lage:      I  always  like  to  see  those  programs  be  real  and  not  just  titles. 
It's  sort  of  unfortunate  that  they  are  often  merely  honorary. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  but  I  believe  it  would  take  only  a  little  time  and  money  to 
make  more  use  of  this  group. 

Lage:      How  many  are  there? 

Whinnery:   There  are  presently  sixteen,  and  nine  are  emeritus. 

Lage:      Are  there  any  functions  for  them  as  a  group?  Did  you  get  to 
know  Josephine  Miles,  for  instance? 

Whinnery:   Some  of  the  presidents  had  annual  dinners  for  them,  but  I  don't 
think  there's  been  one  for  quite  a  few  years.   Yes,  Josephine 
Miles,  when  they  did  have  functions,  was  always  there. 
Marvelous  person. 

Lage:      Had  you  known  her  before? 

Whinnery:   Not  personally.   I  went  to  some  of  her  lectures  and  readings  and 
have  some  of  her  books. 

Lage:      We  have  an  oral  history  with  her,  a  very  nice  one. 


Service  on  University  Committees  //// 


Lage:      I  got  your  bio-bib,  as  you  probably  know.   It's  about  three 
inches  thick,  and  filled  with  lists  of  committees. 

Whinnery:   We  certainly  don't  want  to  talk  about  all  of  them.   Some  took  a 
lot  of  time  but  didn't  accomplish  much.   The  senate  committees 
generally  had  specific  functions  and  good  people  on  them,  so 
worked  well.   The  advisory  committees,  as  that  to  the  Lawrence 
Hall  of  Science,  were  interesting  in  that  we  got  to  see  their 
excellent  programs.   Many  people  think  of  the  Hall  as  just  a 
science  museum,  but  its  main  function  is  in  science  education 
with  both  students  and  their  teachers.   Their  staff  was  very 
good  so  that  was  pleasant  duty. 


171 


Lage: 
Whinnery; 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


More  difficult  were  the  advisory  committees  for  the 
computer  center  when  it  was  being  established.   There  were  both 
financial  and  personnel  problems.   And  I'm  a  computer  ignoramus, 
so  that  may  have  been  part  of  the  problem. 


Study  of  Technological  Aids  to  Education  [1967]. 
university-wide  committee? 


Was  that  a 


At  the  university  level,  there  were  proposals  for  microwave 
relay  links  between  campuses,  primarily  for  TV.   I  don't  think 
these  were  ever  built.   It's  interesting  that  there  was  much 
more  use  of  TV  for  on-campus  instruction  than  there  is  now. 

Is  that  something  you  think  is  useful,  the  use  of  television  as 
an  instructional  tool? 

Yes.   It  was  used  to  tape  a  series  of  lectures  for  use  in 
another  term,  or  to  expand  the  audience  for  a  lecture  by  showing 
it  in  other  rooms.   Studies  have  shown  that  both  of  these 
techniques  work,  but  don't  seem  to  be  a  substitute  for  the  live 
lecturer  when  that's  available.   It's  interesting  that  the  Crown 
College  course  at  Santa  Cruz,  which  I  mentioned,  was  televised 
to  an  overflow  audience,  and  I  made  the  point  of  attending  the 
overflow  room  at  times.   The  students  were  relaxed,  even  taking 
off  their  shoes  at  times,  but  still  attentive.   Nevertheless,  as 
the  term  went  on  and  there  was  room  in  the  auditorium  with  the 
original  lecturer,  more  and  more  of  them  drifted  back  to  the 
live  event. 


Lage:      There  was  a  President's  Committee  on  Innovation  [1969-1970]. 

Whinnery:   That  was  a  university-wide  committee  reporting  to  Vice  President 
Fretter.   It  had  many  meetings  with  emphasis  on  the  rights  to 
intellectual  property.   There  was  a  thick  report  but  I'm  not 
sure  it  changed  anything.   More  effective  was  a  campus  committee 
on  intellectual  property,  set  up  by  Chang-Lin  Tien  when  he  was 
vice  chancellor.   It  largely  concentrated  on  computer  software, 
the  degree  to  which  it  should  be  protected,  and  who  should  have 
the  rights  to  it. 

Lage:      What  were  the  issues,  if  we  can  sort  of  define  them? 

Whinnery:   Many  groups  on  the  campus  develop  valuable  software  for  their 
specialties.   Some  have  distributed  it  at  cost.   Others  have 
hoped  to  recover  some  of  the  costs  of  development  by  charging  a 
royalty.   Should  there  be  a  uniform  policy?   Under  what 
conditions  can  the  software  be  protected  by  copyright  or  even 
patents?   If  there  are  royalties,  what  is  the  proper 
distribution  between  the  developer  and  the  university?  Most 


172 

universities  were  struggling  with  these  issues  at  the  time  we 
met  and  we  tried  to  find  what  others  were  doing,  to  the  extent 
we  could.   It  was  gratifying  to  find  that  the  report  was  read. 
A  software  center  was  set  up  and  the  director  followed  many  of 
our  recommendations. 

Lage:      Those  are  all  really  important  issues,  at  least  to  point  out 

that  they're  there  and  that  you  were  involved  in  them.   Is  there 
anything  else  along  these  lines? 

Whinnery:   That's  probably  enough  to  give  a  feel  for  the  university 
committees.   Most  everyone  agrees  that  there  are  too  many 
committees,  but  I've  often  thought  that  I  wouldn't  know  anyone 
outside  of  our  college  if  it  weren't  for  the  committee 
assignments. 


173 


IX  RESEARCH  AND  TEACHING 


Electromagnetic  Fields  and  Waves:   Approach  to  Problems 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 
Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


It  seems  from  what  you've  told  me  and  others  that  your  research 
falls  into  two  areas. 

Microwaves  and  optics,  yes. 

Maybe  we  could  start  with  microwaves  to  just  give  an  idea  of 
what  your  major  contributions  have  been. 

We've  already  discussed  some  of  the  microwave  work  done  at  GE. 
The  work  on  transmission  lines  and  waveguide  discontinuities, 
using  Hahn's  method,  is  some  of  my  best-known  work.   In  spite  of 
the  more  general  work  of  Schwinger  and  Marcuvitz,  which  we 
talked  about,  I  still  receive  requests  for  reprints  of  our 
papers  on  this  subject. 

So  some  of  the  value  is  that  you  wrote  it  up  in  such  a  way,  or 
continued  the  research  until  it  was  more  accessible? 

Yes,  I  think  presentation  had  something  to  do  with  it.   The 
other  work  that  started  there  was  on  the  microwave  tubes .   We 
were  trying  to  extend  the  very  highest  frequencies  they  would 
work  at.   The  difficulty  is,  if  it  takes  too  long  for  electrons 
to  get  across  compared  with  the  period  of  the  wave,  the  devices 
don't  work.   We  were  trying  to  get  around  these  "transit-time" 
effects. 


Let's  just  look  at  that  for  a  moment, 
own,  or  was  this  a  team  approach? 


Were  you  working  on  your 


The  problems  came  out  of  the  team.  Although  I  was  not  in  Ramo's 
group  formally,  I  worked  closely  with  people  in  that  group.  The 
problems  arose  from  their  experiments  on  new  proposals,  and  we 


174 


would  discuss  them  as  a  group, 
was  pretty  much  on  my  own. 


The  analysis  I  did  at  that  time 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 

Lage  : 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 


Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery i 


Do  the  solutions  come  through  your  working  with  pen  and  paper, 
or  do  they  come  through  discussion  with  colleagues? 

Both.   My  analysis  at  that  stage  was  based  on  a  lot  of  physical 
pictures.   Ramo  had  very  strong  physical  pictures,  and  I  learned 
much  of  that  approach  from  him. 

Tell  me  what  physical  pictures  are. 

Instead  of  just  seeing  things  as  terms  in  an  equation,  you  try 
to  visualize  what  was  happening  in  a  physical  sense.  Once  you 
see  what  you  think  is  important  in  the  physical  sense,  you  can 
often  make  approximations. 

I  looked  over  the  [Charles]  Townes  interview  to  see  if  it  could 
help  me  with  the  questions  for  you.   I  was  very  taken  with  the 
description  that  he  gave  of  having  a  picture  in  his  mind  of  the 
electrons,  and  how  they  moved.   Then  he  would  think,  "What  would 
they  do  if--?"   He  said,  "It's  like  thinking  about  a  friend,  and 
what  he  would  do  if--."1   [laughter]   Does  that  strike  a  bell? 

Well,  the  first  part  of  it  is  the  physical  picture,  exactly  what 
I  was  trying  to  say.   I  hadn't  thought  of  the  anthropomorphic 
aspect  of  it  particularly. 

He  seemed  to  feel  so  familiar  with  electrons.  I  think  that's 
what  he  was  getting  at,  more  than  the  anthropomorphic  aspect. 
And  how  they  would  operate;  he  could  just  imagine  these  things. 

Yes.   I  guess  that  by  the  time  we'd  thought  about  the  electrons 
going  across  a  high-frequency  tube,  we  were  pretty  familiar  with 
them,  too. 


[laughs]   That's  true, 
mathematical  terms? 


So  you're  not  thinking  just  in 


No,  it's  a  combination  of  things, 
level  of  Townes1. 


My  work  is  nowhere  near  the 


'Charles  Hard  Townes,  A  Life  in  Physics:   Bell  Telephone  Laboratories 
and  WWII,  Columbia  University  and  the  Laser,  MIT  and  Government  Service; 
California  and  Research  in  Astrophysics.   Regional  Oral  History  Office, 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1994. 


175 


Lage:      Now,  when  you  say  "nowhere  near  the  level,"  how  is  it  different? 
You're  very  prominent  in  your  field. 

Whinnery:   He  created  a  whole  new  field,  through  first  the  maser  and  then 

the  laser.   Nothing  that  I  did,  did  that.   I  worked  on  extending 
fields. 

Lage:      In  terms  of  the  difference  between  engineering  and  physics, 

could  you  describe  where  one  stops  and  the  other  starts?  Or  is 
it  a  continuum? 

Whinnery:   I  think  it  is  a  continuum.   But  if  you  take  the  extremes,  in 
physics,  you're  trying  to  understand  the  laws  of  how  things 
interact.   In  the  purest  sense,  you  don't  care  whether  they're 
applicable  to  anything  or  not.   In  engineering,  you're  trying  to 
get  something  done,  and  you  bring  in  whatever  laws  you  need  to 
figure  out  how  to  get  it  done.   But  there  is  a  continuum  in 
between.   The  physicists  proved  they  could  be  very  good 
engineers  during  World  War  II  in  many  projects  —  radar,  the 
atomic  bomb,  so  on.   Some  persons  with  engineering  training 
develop  some  very  important  principles. 

Lage:      Where  would  you  put  yourself  on  that  continuum? 

Whinnery:   In  thinking  about  the  problems  where  I  feel  I  have  done  the 
most,  I  think  I  was  inspired  by  a  problem  in  the  engineering 
sense.   So  I  guess  I'd  lean  toward  application.   And  then,  on 
the  other  hand,  very  few  things  I've  carried  far  enough  to  sell. 

Lage:      [laughs]   You're  not  that  practical. 
Whinnery:   No. 

Lage:      But  things  that  intrigue  you  are  things  that  are  going  to  work. 
Am  I  interpreting  it  correctly? 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      But  wouldn't  a  physicist  say  he  had  picked  a  problem,  also? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   I  described  the  two  extremes,  but  many  physicists  are 
really  inspired  by  practical  problems,  too. 

Lage:      When  you  come  to  picking  a  research  problem,  does  your  research 
just  lead  you  from  one  problem  to  another,  or  do  you  actually 
have  a  little  list  in  your  pocket  or  on  your  index  cards  about 
something  you  want  to  work  on  at  some  point? 


176 


Whinnery:   Ideas  may  come  in  a  variety  of  ways,  but  the  work  at  GE  on 

microwaves  was  largely  a  matter  of  evolution- -new  ideas  growing 
out  of  the  preceding  work. 

Lage:      And  when  you  came  here,  how  did  you  extend  that,  or  did  you  make 
a  break  when  you  came  here? 

Whinnery:   No,  I  was  very  much  building  upon  that.   And  later,  the  work  at 
Hughes  on  microwave  traveling-wave  tubes  set  a  new  direction, 
which  I  then  carried  on  here  for  several  years. 


Associate  Research  Engineer  George  Becker 


Whinnery:   One  thing  we  should  emphasize:   a  very  key  person  in  the 

microwave  tube  research  when  1  came  back,  and  then  later  in  the 
lasers  when  I  returned  from  Bell  Laboratories,  was  George  Becker 
[associate  research  engineer].   If  you  talk  to  any  of  the 
graduate  students  who  worked  with  him,  I'm  sure  they'd  say  they 
learned  as  much  or  more  from  George  Becker  than  from  any  faculty 
member  in  the  department. 

Lage:      Tell  me  about  George  Becker,  who  he  was. 

Whinnery:   George  has  worked  on  high-power  tubes  at  Eitel-McCullough 

[Eimac] .   He  worked  with  Dave  Sloan  when  he  first  came  to  the 
university,  and  then  with  our  project  on  traveling-wave  tubes. 
His  degree,  I  think,  was  from  Heald  College,  an  unaccredited 
program,  which  gave  us  some  problem  in  getting  the  right  job 
title.   But  he  had  a  great  breadth  of  knowledge  of  chemistry, 
materials,  and  processes,  and  skills  in  glassblowing,  mechanics, 
and  photography.   He  could  build  anything  and  had  the  reputation 
of  being  able  to  solve  any  problem. 

Lage :      How  would  you  work  with  him? 

Whinnery:   It  was  primarily  the  graduate  students  who  worked  with  him.   One 
of  the  weaknesses  of  the  program,  if  you  like,  is  that  they  came 
out  thinking  that  you  can  get  anything  built.   [laughter]   When 
they  went  to  other  places,  they  discovered  that  wasn't  always 
the  case.   They  designed  some  fairly  crazy  things  sometimes. 

Lage:      They  would  design,  and  he  would  create?   Is  that  how  it  worked? 

Whinnery:   Well,  again,  there  would  be  interaction.   They  would  tell  him 
what  they  wanted,  and  then  he  might  say,  "Wait  a  minute,  you 


Lage: 
Whinnery : 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


177 

can't  do  that,  but  you  can  do  this." 
something  tangible. 


Then  it  would  evolve  into 


Would  he  build  things  for  you  and  other  professors?  Or  mainly 
just  for  the  graduate  students? 

There  were  other  professors,  Everhart,  Susskind,  [Theodore]  Van 
Duzer--well,  Van  Duzer  was  first  a  graduate  student  and  then  a 
faculty  member.   Then  for  the  laser  field,  Steve  Schwarz  and  Ken 
Gustafson.   But  graduate  students  were  involved  with  all  of 
them.   Later  he  worked  with  the  integrated  circuits  program  when 
it  was  getting  started. 

I'm  glad  you  mentioned  him,  because  that  kind  of  person  is  often 
the  unsung  hero. 

Dick  Cruse,  Don  Roger,  Bob  Hamilton,  Wil  Zeilinger,  and  Sam 
Higenbotham  were  also  key  persons  in  making  tubes,  lasers,  and 
instruments  for  us. 


Work  on  Backward-Wave  Turnable  Amplifier,  and  Noise  Aspects 


Lage:      Any  other  areas  in  microwaves? 

Whinnery:  Following  my  work  at  Hughes,  the  work  was  so  much  with  the 
graduate  students  that  it's  a  little  hard  to  say  whether  1 
contributed  anything. 

Lage:      [laughs]   Go  on. 

Whinnery:   One  thing  that  seemed  like  it  was  going  to  be  terribly  important 
was  a  tunable  amplifier  developed  by  Mai  [M.  R.]  Currie  and  me. 
Currie  was  one  of  our  very  outstanding  graduate  students  and 
later  went  on  to  be  chief  executive  at  Hughes.   The  amplifier 
used  backward  waves  and  was  tunable  over  a  wide  range  just  by 
changing  the  voltage. 

Lage:      Why  backward? 

Whinnery:   In  most  traveling-wave  tubes,  the  wave  and  the  electrons  go 

together.   In  the  backward-wave  oscillator  that  had  already  been 
invented,  the  electrons  go  in  one  direction  and  the  wave  goes  in 
the  other.   That's  where  the  backward  aspect  comes  in.   In  any 
event,  it  was  fairly  obvious  you  could  make  an  amplifier,  once 
you  knew  you  could  make  an  oscillator,  but  the  original  ones 
were  unstable.   The  developments  that  Currie  and  I  made  appeared 
to  make  it  into  a  useful  device. 


178 


But,  as  in  so  many  other  cases,  the  function  was  taken  over 
by  a  solid-state  device,  the  tunable  Yig  filter,  which  could  be 
used  with  a  broad-band  amplifier  for  the  same  function. 

I  also  worked  on  noise  aspects,  particularly  as  affected  by 
the  potential  minimum,  the  cathode  region. 

Lage:      What  is  a  noise  aspect? 

Whinnery:   Statistical  fluctuations.   You've  heard  on  your  radio  background 
crackling,  and  that's  noise  from  some  source.   The  most  basic 
part  comes  from  statistical  variations  in  the  electron  flow. 

Lage:      Is  that  where  we  get  the  word  static? 

Whinnery:   No,  static  is  typically  from  lightning  or  some  interfering 

event.   The  noise  of  concern  here  is  from  statistical  variations 
in  electron  flow.   At  first  it  was  thought  you  couldn't  do 
anything  about  it,  that  if  you  have  a  certain  number  of 
electrons  in  a  stream,  there's  going  to  be  so  much  variation. 
But  it  turns  out  that  there  are  things  you  can  do  near  the 
cathode--the  source  of  the  electrons  —  to  smooth  out  this  noise. 
Noise  is  an  interference  and  determines  the  smallest  signal  that 
you  can  detect.   So  I  did  quite  a  lot  of  work  in  that  area  with 
several  graduate  students. 


Other  Researchers,  and  Publication 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 


Was  this  a  general  problem  that  many  people  were  working  on,  how 
to  reduce  the  noise? 

Yes.   MIT,  Stanford,  and  Hughes  were  especially  active  in  this 
area. 


How  does  research  proceed  when  there  ate  many  people? 
it  varies  in  various  locations. 


I  assume 


First  of  all,  there  are  conferences.   You  present  a  paper  at  the 
conference,  and  argue  with  the  people  that  either  say  they've 
done  the  same  thing,  or  that  you're  all  wet.   Sometimes  you  are 
wrong,  and  you  start  over.   And  then,  of  course,  you  keep  up 
with  the  journal  publications,  too,  and  contribute  your  own 
papers. 

Has  there  been  a  change  over  time  in  how  cooperative  different 
researchers  are,  or  how  competitive,  would  you  say? 


179 


Whinnery:   In  one  sense,  it  seems  to  have  got  more  competitive,  but  the 
effect  has  been  almost  more  publication  and  more  hurried 
publication.   "I've  got  to  get  this  out  before  somebody  else 
gets  it  in  print." 

Lage:      So  maybe  something  that ' s  not  fully  considered  comes  out? 

Whinnery:   I  think  some  things  would  have  been  better  to  have  waited. 

There  also  seems  to  be  a  lot  of  duplicate  publication.   There 
are  a  dozen  journals  you  can  publish  in,  and  people  will  present 
the  same  material  with  only  minor  variations  in  several  of  them. 

Lage:      Is  this  to  get  your  list  of  publications  increased? 

Whinnery:   That's  certainly  one  of  the  pressures.   And  sometimes,  editors 
of  the  journal  invite  you:   "You've  done  work  in  this  field, 
please  write  us  an  article  on  it."   Some  of  those  invited  papers 
are  very  useful,  but  I  think  the  total  effect  is  that  there  is 
too  much  duplication. 

Lage:      You  mentioned  that  that  was  an  area  where  you  worked  on  your 
own,  rather  than  with  graduate  students. 

Whinnery:   There  were  more  of  my  own  ideas  in  the  noise  work  than  in  some 
other  areas,  but  there  were  also  contributions  from  graduate 
students  Bill  [William  B.]  Bridges,  Marty  [Martin  A. ]  Pollack, 
and  Ted  Van  Duzer. 

Lage:      And  did  your  ideas  end  up  in  a  practical  application? 

Whinnery:   I  think  they  were  part  of  an  evolution  of  understanding.   One  of 
the  papers  is  reprinted  in  one  of  the  series  where  they  reprint 
so-called  classics,  but  I  don't  think  it  changed  the  nature  of 
traveling-wave  tubes  as  much  as  work  of  Dean  Watkins  in  his 
Stanford  thesis,  or  Hermann  Haus  of  MIT,  or  Mai  Currie  in  his 
later  work  at  Hughes. 


Teaching  and  Guiding  Graduate  Students 


Lage:      Should  we  discuss  teaching  now  as  we  discuss  research,  how  you 
work  with  your  graduate  students? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  I  think  so,  because  really,  my  research  at  the  university 
has  been  through,  with,  and  by  the  graduate  students. 

Lage:      Maybe  you  can  describe  how  a  graduate  student  selects  a  problem. 


180 


Whinnery:   Yes.   First  of  all,  there  are  several  extremes.   There  are 

people  who  are  told,  "You  are  assigned  to  do  this;  when  you  get 
this  done,  you  get  your  Ph.D."  And  the  other  extreme  is,  "Your 
problem  is  to  find  a  problem,  and  when  you  get  a  good  one,  come 
back  to  me  and  I'll  see  if  it's  okay." 

Lage:      And  that  depends  on  the  professor? 

Whinnery:   That  depends  on  the  professor.   These  are  the  extremes  that  you 
find.   A  lot  of  people  are  in  between,  and  I'm  certainly  one  of 
those.   In  general,  I  had  a  list  of  suggested  problems.   Quite 
often  these  were  evolutionary,  that  had  grown  out  of  what  we  had 
done  before,  but  looked  like  the  next  interesting  step.   On  the 
other  hand,  sometimes  a  student  came  in  saying,  "Why  don't  we  do 
so-and-so,  I'd  like  to  do  this."   Sometimes  it  would  be 
completely  impractical,  either  because  we  didn't  have  the 
facilities  or  didn't  think  it  a  good  idea,  but  often  I'd  say, 
"Yes,  that's  a  really  nice  problem.   We'll  see  if  we  can  work  it 
out . " 


But  even  when  they  started  a  problem  I  suggested  and  worked 
for  about  a  year  they  would  often  come  back  and  have  a  newer  or 
better  idea. 

Lage:      A  redefinition  of  that  problem? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  or  sometimes  it  would  be  quite  different.   They  would  be 

reading  the  literature  and  get  excited  about  something  they  saw, 
or  go  to  a  conference  and  hear  something,  and  say,  "Hey,  why 
don't  we  work  on  that  for  a  while?"  At  that  time,  we  had  quite 
a  lot  of  flexibility  with  the  Joint  Services  program  and  even 
the  NSF  support.   As  long  as  we  kept  the  project  managers 
informed,  they  encouraged—not  just  random  jumping  around--but 
evolution  into  new  areas. 

Lage:      Would  you  have  to  justify  why  one  thing  was  being  dropped  and 
another  taken  up? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   But  it  was  pretty  easy  for  a  while,  just  very  informal. 

Now  there  is  more  and  more  the  feeling,  "You  made  this  proposal, 
why  didn't  you  do  step  seven  that  you  proposed?" 

Lage:      Even  if  it  doesn't  sound  reasonable  to  continue? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   If  it's  research,  you  don't  know  necessarily  that  step 
seven  will  make  any  sense  after  you've  done  some  of  the  other 
steps.   But  most  of  the  agencies  seem  to  have  gotten  more 
nervous  about  defending  the  fact  that  they're  getting  what  they 
paid  for. 


181 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


That  seems  short-sighted.   Was  there,  by  way  of  illustration,  a 
particular  graduate  student  that  combined  all  the  good  qualities 
that-- 

Oh,  I  had  so  many. 

Or  can  you  discuss  how  you  worked  with  them? 

I  had  so  many  great  ones  that  it's  a  little  hard  to  single  any 
one  out.   One  example  of  an  extreme  change  of  direction  is  Amnon 
Yariv,  who's  now  a  very  famous  professor  at  Caltech.   He  had 
done  his  master's  project  on  a  problem  with  microwave  tubes, 
measuring  velocity  distribution  of  the  electron  stream  after 
interaction.   He  went  to  a  conference  in  Boulder  where  the  maser 
was  described,  and  came  back  and  asked,  couldn't  we  work  on  the 
maser. 

I  didn't  know  enough  about  it  to  feel  confident  to 
supervise  him,  but  we  got  help  from  Alan  [M. ]  Portis  in  physics, 
and  then  George  Feher,  who  was  a  former  student  here  but  was 
then  at  Bell  Laboratories,  and  Jay  Singer,  of  our  department. 
This  was  supported  by  the  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific 
Research  and  had  to  be  cleared  with  them.   So  that  was  an 
extreme  case  but  was  successful  in  that  Amnon  went  on  to  become 
one  of  the  world  leaders  in  quantum  electronics. 

It  sounds  like  you  were  open  to  these  new  ideas. 
I  tried  to  be. 

Is  that  across  the  board  with  professors,  or  is  there  a 
continuum  there  too? 


I  think  there's  a  continuum, 
specific  problem. 


The  extreme  is  to  assign  a 


Lage: 


In  those  cases,  is  that  usually  a  problem  that  contributes  to 
the  professor's  research  very  strongly? 

Yes.   And  to  defend  that  point  of  view,  it  may  be  the  best  way 
to  make  a  strong  contribution  to  a  research  field.   The  argument 
against  the  other  approach  is  that  if  you  jump  around  all  the 
time  to  a  smattering  of  things,  you  don't  make  a  major 
contribution  to  any  one  of  them.   But  educationally,  I  think 
it's  marvelous  to  allow  some  flexibility. 

You  do  seem  to  have  a  strong  grounding  in  being  an  educator. 
That  comes  across  very  clearly. 


182 


Whinnery:   I  hope  so. 

Lage:      I'm  sure  that  must  vary  a  lot,  too,  among  the  professors,  how 
committed  they  are  to  education. 

Whinnery:   I  think  most  of  them  here  are  very  committed.   They  may  have 
different  styles,  but  it's  really  the  point  of  being  here. 

Lage:      They  could  be  other  places  if  they  wanted. 

Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      Were  there  any  dead  ends  in  your  microwave  research? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   Certainly  some  of  these  projects  didn't  accomplish 
what  I  hoped  they  would  when  I  started. 

Lage:      Is  that  hard,  when  you've  invested  a  great  deal  of  your  time  and 
thought  and  see  it's  not  going  anywhere? 

Whinnery:  Well,  it's  not  as  much  fun  as  getting  an  exciting,  positive 
result,  that's  for  sure.  [laughter]  But  it  is  part  of  the 
process. 


Quantum  and  Optical  Electronics 


Lage:      What  about  when  you  reoriented  your  research  after  the  deanship? 
Why  did  you  take  that  step? 

Whinnery:   I  realized  that  I  had  to  do  something  more  than  just  take  a 

year's  sabbatical  here  or  in  some  other  university,  and  I  had  an 
opportunity  at  Bell  Laboratories.   I  had  a  lot  of  friends  at 
Bell,  and  an  open  invitation  to  go  there.   Of  course,  I  realized 
that  the  group  that  I  knew  who  had  worked  on  microwave  tubes  had 
largely  changed  to  lasers  at  that  point.   But  it  wasn't  so  much 
choosing  to  go  into  the  laser  field  as  it  was  a  chance  to  work 
with  an  exciting  group. 

Lage:      So  that  was  a  common  transition? 
Whinnery:   It  was  very  common  at  that  time. 

At  first,  it  was  pretty  tough.   Because  of  the  time  in 
administration,  I  was  even  behind  in  microwaves,  and  now  I  was 
trying  to  move  into  something  new.   But  since  these  were  mostly 


183 


people  who  had  also  changed  from  microwaves  to  lasers,  they  knew 
the  transition  that  I  was  going  through  and  were  very  helpful. 

Lage:      Is  there  a  common  thread,  then,  between  the  concepts? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  part  which  is  different  is  called  quantum  electronics 
and  requires  a  good  knowledge  of  quantum  mechanics.   But  90 
percent,  maybe  more,  of  laser  work  is  just  classical,  and  the 
electromagnetics  is  the  same,  just  a  different  optical 
frequency.   So  there  is  a  lot  in  common,  particularly  with  the 
part  that  I  worked  on. 

Lage:      Tell  me  about  your  contributions  -in  the  area  of  quantum 
electronics.   What  major  things  did  you  work  on? 

Whinnery:   Much  of  my  work  was  on  periodic  systems  for  guiding  light. 

Fibers  at  that  time  were  too  lossy  to  be  of  use,  though  now,  of 
course,  are  the  dominant  means  of  optical  guiding.   Probably  the 
most  important  work  was  that  on  the  thermal  lens  effect.   Sergio 
Porto  had  observed  some  strange  effects  when  he  placed  cells  of 
organic  liquids  in  a  laser  cavity.   They  appeared  to  be  thermal 
effects  from  the  absorbed  light,  but  these  were  very  transparent 
liquids,  so  the  first  calculations  seemed  to  rule  out  this 
explanation.   After  considering  many  alternate  explanations,  Jim 
Gordon  and  I  made  a  detailed  analysis  and  found  even  the  small 
absorption  enough  to  explain  the  effect.   It  turned  out  to  be 
quite  important,  sometimes  as  an  undesirable  effect,  but  also 
useful  for  measuring  very  small  absorptions.   It  is  a  simple 
effect,  and  I  guess  should  have  been  obvious  as  a  thermal  effect 
from  the  beginning. 

Lage:      That  must  be  true  of  a  lot  of  things,  when  you  look  back  on 
them. 

Whinnery:   So  a  number  of  the  things,  after  I  came  back  here,  were  built 

around  that.   We  also  began  to  get  a  group  of  graduate  students 
that  were  so  imaginative  that  they  were  almost  setting  the 
program.   People  like  Erich  Ippen,  who's  at  MIT,  and  Bill 
[William  M. ]  Clark,  now  at  Hughes,  and  Marvin  Klein,  also  at 
Hughes,  and  later  Dave  Auston,  now  dean  at  Columbia,  and  Ron 
Schmidt,  now  at  Synoptics.   So  their  ideas  were  building  the 
program  as  much  as  mine. 


ISA 


Developing  Group  Research  with  Graduate  Students  and  Other 
Professors 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


How  do  you  tie  up  with  graduate  students? 
a  great  group  of  them? 


How -did  you  get  such 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 


[laughs]  I've  often  wondered.   Jay  [Jerome]  Singer  had  started 
the  program  with  Shyh  Wang,  first  with  masers,  and  then  leading 
into  lasers.   I  mentioned  Amnon  Yariv,  who  was  really  the  first 
student  in  that  field.   Jay  had  some  very  good  students,  too, 
and  had  built  up  the  laboratory. 

When  were  they  active? 

It  was  largely  during  the  period  I  was  dean.   When  I  came  back, 
Jay  wanted  to  move  more  into  the  bioengineering  area,  and  Shyh 
Wang  at  that  time  was  pretty  much  working  on  the  ferrimagnetic 
materials.   So  there  was  a  beginning  of  a  facility,  and  Singer 
was  very  gracious  in  letting  us  use  it.   The  students  that  he 
had  finishing  up  at  that  time  were  very  helpful  to  us  in  getting 
started. 

There  was  then  a  reservoir  of  students  who  saw  this  as  an 
exciting  area,  but  found  nobody  to  work  with.   So  when  I  came 
back  from  Bell  and  had  some  ideas,  there  were  interested 
students.   Then  once  you  get  some  good  students,  by  word  of 
mouth  you  get  more. 

Do  they  come  to  you  and  ask  if  they  can  work  with  you? 

It  works  both  ways.   There  may  be  applicants  for  research 
assistantships,  and  if  you  have  a  research  assistantship 
available,  you  may,  on  the  basis  of  the  student's  record,  offer 
it.   But  quite  often,  it's  somebody  who  has  a  fellowship  who 
hasn't  made  a  commitment  to  anyone.   Usually  they  will  talk  to 
three  or  four  faculty  members  before  making  a  decision. 

How  often  do  you  say,  "No,  I  don't  think  that  will  work"? 

One  of  the  embarrassing  things--Chuck  [Charles  V.]  Shank,  the 
LBL  director,  claims  that  I  turned  him  down.   What  we  did  do  at 
that  time  was  try  to  divide  up  students  somewhat.   Steve  Schwarz 
and  I  would  look  at  students  together,  and  Steve  wanted  to  work 
with  him.   Later,  when  Ken  Gustafson  came,  we  continued  to  work 
very  closely  as  a  group. 

How  do  you  work  as  a  group  with  other  professors?  Are  you  in 
the  lab  together,  or  you  confer  on  problems,  or--? 


185 


Whinnery:   We  certainly  confer.   I  don't  know  whether  you  noticed,  but  of 

the  Ph.D.  students  I've  had  in  the  last  couple  of  decades,  quite 
a  number  of  them  are  jointly  supervised.  Most  of  mine  have  been 
with  Andrew  Dienes,  who  contributed  a  great  deal  to  our  program. 
He  is  a  faculty  member  at  Davis,  but  came  here  first  from  Bell 
Laboratories  on  a  visiting  year.   We  worked  very  well  together, 
so  after  he  went  to  Davis,  he  continued  to  come  in  regularly.   I 
also  had  students  jointly  supervised  with  Shyh  Wang,  Ken 
Gustafson,  and  Steve  Smith. 

In  general,  when  you  meet  with  students,  you  do  it  in  one 
of  two  ways.   Either  individually,  each  student  comes  in, 
typically  once  a  week  for  an  hour,  and  then  you  set  up  other 
times  if  there's  something  that  needs  it.   Or,  you  have  a  group 
meeting,  and  then  again,  set  up  individual  meetings  as  they're 
needed.   When  you're  working  with  other  faculty  members,  the 
group  meeting  tends  to  be  the  most  efficient  way.  The  last 
several  years,  I  mostly  have  worked  with  Dienes  and  then  with 
Steve  Smith,  using  group  meetings. 

Lage:      Is  that  a  trend,  towards  more  group  team  research? 

Whinnery:   I  haven't  observed  it.   I  think  we  probably  do  it  more  in  our 
group  than  is  typical  of  the  department  or  in  other 
universities.   But  there  are  certainly  other  groups  with  close 
cooperation. 

Lage:      Not  being  in  a  field  like  this,  I  hadn't  realized  what  key  roles 
the  graduate  students  had  in  advancing  the  research.  Are  they 
appreciated  uniformly  by  all  the  professors? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  I  think  so.   I  think  it's  well  understood  by  most  people 

that  without  good  graduate  students,  you  aren't  going  to  have  a 
first-class  research  program. 

Lage:      If  you  had  to  describe  what  role  you  took  with  your  graduate 
students,  what  is  your  function,  or  is  each  one  different? 

Whinnery:   I  described  it  to  one  of  them  once  as  like  a  fight  manager, 
[laughter] 

Lage:      Oh,  that's  intriguing!  Tell  me  more.  A  fight  manager? 

Whinnery:  Well,  you  have  to  keep  them  in  training,  and  when  it's  time  for 
them  to  present  papers,  that's  their  bout,  and  so  on. 


Lage: 


Do  you  help  them  with  the  presentation  aspect  of  it? 


186 


Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 


Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Oh,  yes.   First  of  all,  we  go  over  the  written  paper,  and  then 
usually  the  student  will  rehearse  the  presentation  once  or 
sometimes  many  times. 

Is  it  on  delivery  or  on  content? 
Both. 


The  things  you  describe  come  after  they've  done  their  work, 
do  you  help  shape  the  process  of  doing  the  work  itself? 


How 


Quite  typically,  and  part  of  it  is  related  to  the  early 
publication  that  1  mentioned  before,  a  Ph.D.  student,  by  the 
time  he  or  she  gets  the  degree,  may  have  anywhere  from  two  or 
three  to  two  dozen  publications.   Even  though  they  haven't 
finished  the  whole  of  the  project,  publications  may  be  on  parts 
of  the  project.   It  typically  doesn't  start  in  the  first  year; 
may  not  even  in  the  second.   But  by  the  third  or  fourth  year, 
quite  often  they  have  results  that  are  worth  presenting. 

How  do  you  help  them  along  in  their  search  for  these  results  as 
they're  working  through  their  research  problems?   Do  you  leave 
them  on  their  own? 

This  is  where  the  meetings  come  in,  whether  you  have  a  group 
meeting  or  individual  one.   If  you  do  it  as  a  group  with  all  of 
the  graduate  students  together,  the  other  students  do  as  much  of 
the  guidance  as  you  do,  or  sometimes  more.   They'll  argue  with 
each  other  and  shoot  down  some  of  the  false  ideas.   It's  a 
continuous  process. 


You  treat  them  as  a  fellow 


It  shows  a  lot  of  respect, 
researcher,  I'm  gathering. 

Yes. 


And  you're  somebody  that  they  can  get  feedback  from. 

That's  right.  For  the  first  couple  of  years,  you  hope  you're 
teaching  them,  and  the  next  couple  of  years,  they're  teaching 
you. 

No  wonder  it's  exciting.   With  all  these  graduate  students  that 
you  had,  and  so  many  successful  ones,  are  there  common  qualities 
about  their  minds  or  their  styles  that  you  would  say  make  a 
successful  research  engineer? 

Of  course,  there  are  obvious  differences  in  personality,  and 
even  approach  to  problems.   But  yes,  they  certainly  have  to  be 


187 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


curious  and  excited  by  what  they're  doing,  and  willing  to  work 
very  hard.   That  isn't  to  say  they  have  to  work  twenty- four 
hours  a  day  every  day—most  of  them  have  hobbies,  skiing,  or 
something  equivalent — but  I  guess  the  curiosity  is  the  key  thing 
that's  common  to  most  of  them. 

A  devotion  to  the  field  as  well,  perhaps? 

Yes.   It  has  been  an  exciting  field  during  this  period. 

Have  you  had  any  notable  failures  among  your  graduate  students? 

There  certainly  were  a  couple—maybe  more  than  a  couple—who 
started  and  didn't  finish  for  various  reasons.   And  there  were 
some  that  we  considered  marginal,  but  even  these  did  useful  work 
afterwards. 


After  you  bring  your  graduate  students  along, 
in  launching  them  into  a  job? 


do  you  take  a  role 


You  try  to  help  them  find  their  first  job.   Quite  often,  if  that 
doesn't  work  out,  you're  involved  in  advising  them  and  certainly 
writing  letters  of  reference  if  they  want  to  change.   Sometimes 
that  goes  on  for  years  and  years.   But  most  of  the  discussion  is 
about  the  first  job.  Right  now,  they  aren't  getting  as  many 
offers  as  they  once  did,  but  I  think  most  of  them  are  finding 
something.  Typically,  when  they  have  more  than  one  offer,  they 
want  your  views  on  the  relative  values  to  them.  They  don't 
always  take  the  advice.   I  never  tell  anyone  which  job  to  take 
but  try  to  tell  them  the  pros  and  cons  of  the  various 
alternatives. 

Do  they  usually  have  a  pretty  clear  idea  whether  they  want  to  go 
into  industry  or  the  academic  world  by  that  time? 

Yes.   There  are  exceptions.   In  our  field,  most  people  agree 
that  it's  well  to  go  into  industry  for  a  few  years,  even  if  a 
university  is  the  end  goal.  There  are  some  other  cases  where  a 
university  job  will  be  offered  right  away,  and  there  may  be 
reasons  to  take  it. 


Funding  for  Research 


Lage: 


We've  talked  about  government  grants.   In  the  sixties  and 
seventies  there  was  a  lot  of  mistrust  of  government  directing 
research,  war-related  research  and  all.   Do  you  think  there  is  a 


188 


danger  of  having  so  much  either  federally-financed  or 
industrial- financed  research?  Does  it  skew  the  direction  of  the 
field? 

Whinnery:   Most  of  the  government  agencies  that  we  work  with,  NSF,  Office 
of  Naval  Research,  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research,  and 
the  Army  Research  Office,  have  had  a  pretty  broad  view  of  what 
they  want  from  university  research.   The  Mansfield  amendment,  at 
the  time  of  the  Vietnam  War,  required  that  research  supported  by 
the  Department  of  Defense  be  applicable  to  the  military.   But 
nearly  everything  in  electrical  engineering—lasers,  integrated 
circuits,  or  computer  software—has  potential  for  either 
civilian  or  defense  uses,  so  that  didn't  change  things  much. 
Now  there  is  more  emphasis  on  directed  research.   Even  NSF  has 
had  pressure  from  Congress  for  more  "strategic"  research. 

On  the  industrial  research,  there  are  certain  cases  of 
companies  coming  in  and  wanting  to  support  something  with  too 
rigid  a  definition,  a  product  that  doesn't  make  sense  to  try  to 
do  in  a  university.   But  most  of  the  industries  that  contribute 
do  so  on  a  much  broader  basis  than  that. 

Lage:      Is  that  a  significant  source  of  research  money? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes,  it  is  now.   It  didn't  used  to  be.   I  told  you  about  the 
industrial  liaison  program  that  was  held  last  week.   Dean  Hodges 
gave  the  breakdown  of  industrial  support.   I  think  it's  about  a 
third  of  the  support  now. 

Lage:      And  that's  significantly  higher  than  it  used  to  be?   Industries 
are  stepping  into  the  void  of  reduced  federal  funds? 

Whinnery:   Somewhat,  yes. 

Lage:      Somewhat.   Is  research  money  tighter  now  than  it  was? 

Whinnery:   Federal  research  budgets  have  continued  to  increase  but 

competition  for  those  funds  seems  to  be  more  severe  all  the 
time. 

II 

Lage:      It  strikes  me  that  during  this  time  period  we're  talking  about, 
probably  when  people  look  at  it  from  a  distance,  the  really 
significant  thing  in  the  growth  of  the  engineering  school,  and 
maybe  the  university  as  a  whole,  is  all  the  federal  research 
money . 


189 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.  Clark  Kerr  called  the  major  universities  "federal 
grant  universities"  in  his  book  on  the  multiversity.1 

Lage:      And  as  that  drops  off--maybe  it  won't  drop  off.   Maybe  I'm  being 
pessimistic. 

Whinnery:   It  would  certainly  change  things  a  lot  if  support  stopped 

completely.   I  don't  think  it  will  stop  completely.   It  not  only 
may  get  tighter,  but  it  does  seem  to  be  changing  character, 
becoming  more  specific  on  the  work  to  be  supported. 

Lage:      I  see,  less  basic  research. 
Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:  For  instance,  what  happened  at  Stanford—scandal  relating  to 
research  and  overhead  costs  and  everything—did  that  have  an 
impact? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  that  affects  everybody,  yes.   There's  more  attention  to 

overhead  rates  and  new  rules.   Since  I  don't  have  a  grant  right 
now,  I'm  not  up  on  the  details,  but  it  certainly  is  affecting 
everybody. 

Lage:      You  were  in  at  the  right  time,  I  would  say. 
Whinnery:   I  guess  so.   That's  right. 

Lage:      Do  you  think  we've  covered  things  that  you  want  to  see  covered 
in  terms  of  research  and  teaching? 

Whinnery:   I  think  so.   If  I  think  of  anything  else,  we  can  fill  it  in. 

Lage:  I  like  starting  up  the  next  session  with  your  thoughts  from  the 
week  before,  because  you  think  things  through  and  think  of  what 
we  missed.  You  always  come  up  with  something  useful. 


'Clark  Kerr,  The  Uses  of  the  University,  Harvard  University  Press, 
1963. 


190 


Optics  and  Laser  Research 


[Interview  7:   March  23,  1994]  it 


Lage:      I  know  we  haven't  discussed  in  depth  any  of  the  technical 

aspects  of  your  research,  I  suppose  because  I  feel  at  a  loss  to 
even  talk  to  you  about  them. 

Whinnery:   We  have  talked  about  the  microwave  work  in  about  as  much  detail 
as  makes  sense  to  do  here,  and  also  the  laser  work  at  Bell. 
Maybe  a  little  more  can  be  said  about  the  laser  and 
optoelectronics  work  at  UC.   I  don't  think  any  of  this  is 
earthshaking,  but  we  have  had  some  interesting  things  to  work 
on. 

After  returning  from  Bell,  there  was  some  continuation  of 
the  thermal  lens  work  we  talked  about.   This  is  a  fairly  simple 
effect;  it  is  surprising  how  little  absorption  there  has  to  be 
to  make  the  effect  significant.   Sometimes  it's  useful,  and 
sometimes  not. 

Lage:      I  don't  want  to  divert  you  with  naive  questions,  but  what  do  you 
mean  by  so  little  absorption?   Is  there  a  framework  to  help  me 
understand  it? 

Whinnery:   When  light  goes  through  a  glass  or  material  we  think  of  as 
transparent,  most  of  it  goes  through,  but  some  of  it  is 
absorbed.   So  materials  that  we  normally  think  of  as  having  very 
little  absorption  may  nevertheless  have  enough  so  that  the 
heating  from  it  changes  the  character  of  the  path  for  the  laser 
beam,  and  either  causes  focusing  or  defocusing. 

Lage:      I  see.   So  that  effect  is  what  you  were  studying. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  we  continued  some  of  that  work.   In  addition,  in  starting 
the  new  program,  we  looked  at  a  number  of  different  laser 
mechanisms --ion  lasers,  and  microwave  discharges  for  excitation 
of  helium-neon  lasers. 

Then  there  was  some  very  interesting  work  with  Erich  Ippen 
and  Ron  Schmidt  on  acousto-optic  interactions,  particularly  the 
laser  beams  interacting  with  surface  acoustic  waves.  Then  I  had 
suggested  to  Dave  Auston,  one  of  our  excellent  graduate 
students,  the  possibility  of  making  patterns  by  combining 
transverse  modes,  and  he  realized  you  could  lock  them  to  make 
very  rapidly  scanning  patterns.   This  technique  of  transverse 
mode  locking  was  carried  on  by  a  couple  of  students  after  that. 


191 

There  was  some  interesting  work  with  liquid  crystals  for  optical 
modulation,  suggested  by  Chenming  Hu  after  learning  of  the  basic 
work  of  Y.  Ron  Shen  in  physics. 

There  was  a  great  deal  of  work,  largely  started  when  Andrew 
Dienes  came  here  from  Bell  Laboratories,  on  short  optical 
pulses.   This  was  first  with  dye  lasers  and  then  with  other 
materials.   In  addition  to  the  generation  of  those,  we  studied 
their  switching  aspects.   This  was  particularly  interesting 
because  the  photoconductive  switches  were  developed  by  Dave 
Auston,  whom  we've  just  mentioned,  after  he  went  to  the  Bell 
Laboratories . 

Lage:      There  seems  to  be  a  lot  of  back  and  forth  between  researchers. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   In  the  last  few  years,  the  concentration  has  been  on 

semiconductor  lasers,  particularly  laser  arrays  and  the  surface 
emitting  semiconductor  lasers.   Most  of  the  standard 
semiconductor  lasers  emit  through  an  edge,  but  for  some  purposes 
it's  a  lot  simpler  if  you  can  get  it  to  emit  normally  to  the 
surface.   That  has  been  an  active  field  in  a  number  of  places 
during  the  last  few  years. 

One  interesting  area  of  work  relates  to  doping 
superlattices,  popularly  known  as  nipis,  because  there's  an  N 
region,  an  intrinsic  region,  and  a  positive  region,  forming  a 
kind  of  a  sandwich.  The  way  in  which  we  started  that  work  is 
interesting.   One  of  our  students,  Ghulam  Hasnain,  took  a  summer 
job  at  Hewlett-Packard.  A  very  interesting  person,  Gottfried 
Dbhler,  was  working  there  on  nipi  devices,  and  convinced  him 
this  would  be  something  exciting  to  work  on.   So  we  had  a 
cooperative  program  with  Hewlett-Packard  while  he  was  there,  and 
in  fact,  that  still  continues,  even  though  Dohler  has  gone  to 
Germany  as  a  professor  at  Erlangen.   These  are  interesting 
devices  because  they're  electrically  tunable.   Both  Ghulam  and 
his  wife  Connie  [Chang-Hasnain]  did  some  very  nice  work  on  those 
devices . 

Lage:      Are  they  a  husband-wife  team? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   They  met  as  graduate  students  and  were  married  while  they 
were  students  here.  They  worked  on  different  aspects  of  the 
nipis.  Ghulam  made  some  broadly  tunable  light-emitting  diodes 
and  Connie  modulators.  Connie  also  did  some  excellent  work  on 
laser  arrays. 

Lage:      Were  they  both  your  students? 


192 


Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Yes,  jointly  with  Andrew  Dienes. 
a  lot  of  joint  supervision. 


I  mentioned  before  that  we  did 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 


Was  this  idea  that  came  from  Hewlett-Packard  something  that  was 
needed  for  them  to  move  forward  in  an  industrial  use? 

They  hoped  it  would  be.   I'm  sorry  to  say  that  it  hasn't  got 
into  commercial  use  yet,  so  far  as  I  know.   The  attractiveness 
is  the  electrical  tunability,  but  it  would  be  especially  useful 
if  you  could  make  a  voltage-tunable  laser.   And  though  other 
tunable  devices  were  made,  I  don't  think  anyone  has  accomplished 
the  tunable  nipi  laser. 

Would  that  be  something  that  you  would  encourage  another 
graduate  student  to  pursue? 

We  did  have  one  more  after  that,  Xin  Wu,  who  worked  in  that 
field.   If  I  were  still  taking  graduate  students,  I'd  have  to 
feel  that  we  had  a  new  approach  before  encouraging  anyone  else 
to  attack  the  laser  problem.   There  is  other  interesting  nipi 
work  to  be  done,  and  Professor  Db'hler's  group  in  Germany  is 
still  very  active  in  the  field. 

What  do  you  consider  when  you're  thinking  about  whether  to 
continue?  Do  you  consider  how  large  a  risk  is  involved? 

There  should  be  interesting  problems  to  solve,  and,  yes,  there 
should  be  some  chance  of  success.   And  of  course  there  should  be 
a  source  of  funds  for  the  project. 

Did  this  cooperative  Hewlett-Packard  program  mean  that  Hewlett- 
Packard  gave  funds  for  the  graduates  to  do  research? 

During  Ghulam's  summer  work  period,  they  of  course  paid  him. 
After  that  it  was  mostly  use  of  special  equipment  there  to 
supplement  what  we  had  here.   Then,  of  course,  we  exchanged 
ideas. 

I  think  those  are  good  illustrations  of  many  things  we  wanted  to 
get  at. 

I  had  a  question  that  may  or  may  not  be  fruitful.   I 
noticed  in  your  papers  that  a  former  student  of  yours  was  quoted 
as  saying  that  you  "...  imparted  a  point  of  view  and  an  approach 
which  have  influenced  everything  I  have  done  over  the  years." 
Could  you  describe  what  kind  of  point  of  view  and  approach  you 
would  hope  to  impart?  We'd  have  to  ask  him  what  he  meant  by 
that,  but  do  you  have  a  thought  about  what  kind  of  approach 
you're  trying  to  impart  to  your  students? 


193 

Whinnery:   You  try  to  get  them  to  think  of  new  ideas  and  to  be  very 

critical  in  analyzing  them.   Theoretical  analysis  and  carefully 
planned  experiments  are  used  to  test  the  ideas.   But  most 
everyone  I  know  does  somewhat  the  same. 

Lage:  From  what  I  understand  about  the  loyalty  of  your  former 
students,  you  must  do  it  very  well.  But  maybe  it  isn't 
different  from  others. 

Whinnery:   Well,  everybody  has  a  different  style,  but  I  think  the 
principles  are  very  much  the  same. 

Lage:      Okay.   We'll  leave  that  at  that  point. 


194 


X  SERVICE  TO  GOVERNMENTAL  AND  SCIENTIFIC  AGENCIES 


Lage:      Shall  we  look  now  at  the  different  governmental  and  scientific 
agencies  that  you've  served  with? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  but  not  in  a  lot  of  detail.   There  are  obviously  too  many 
committees.   I  should  have  said  "No"  more  often. 

Lage:      [laughter]   Of  course,  I  didn't  list  all  of  them. 


Advisory  Group  on  Electronic  Devices.  Department  of  Defense. 
1957  to  1966 


Whinnery:   The  first  one  listed  is  the  Advisory  Group  on  Electronic  Devices 
[AGED] .   This  was  a  Department  of  Defense  [DOD]  committee  made 
up  of  project  engineers  from  army,  navy,  or  air  force  labs  plus 
several  members  from  universities  or  industry.   The  purpose  was 
to  coordinate  work  of  the  different  agencies  on  new  electron 
devices.   So  the  project  engineers  would  present  their  proposals 
for  new  research  or  development  grants  for  discussion  and 
approval.   Sometimes  they  would  already  have  in  mind  the  place 
to  do  the  work,  and  if  so,  the  committee  would  discuss  whether 
or  not  that  was  the  best  place  for  it. 

So  there  was  a  tremendous  amount  of  work,  and  I  developed  a 
lot  of  respect  for  these  very  hard-working  and  largely 
unappreciated  engineers  at  the  DOD  agencies  who  were  managing 
these  programs. 

Lage:      I  think  that's  an  important  point,  your  attitude  about  what  we 

might  call  bureaucrats.   Were  they  scientifically  sophisticated, 
would  you  say? 


195 


Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 


A  few  had  Ph.D.  degrees,  but  usually  only  bachelor's  or  master's 
degrees.   But  they  knew  their  field  of  responsibility  very  well. 


Who  were  the  other  civilians?  What  type  of  people? 
expect  you  to  remember  their  names . 


I  wouldn't 


Let's  see.   Art  Samuel  of  IBM  was  the  chairperson  for  a  long 
time.   When  he  left,  I  was  asked  to  be  the  chair,  but  I  didn't 
accept.   Ed  Harold  of  RCA  and  Gerry  [William  G.]  Shephard  of  the 
University  of  Minnesota  were  especially  strong  members. 

That  was  a  long-time  commitment,  it  seems.   Almost  ten  years.   I 
have  '57  to  '66. 

Yes,  that  sounds  about  right. 


Classified  Consultant  on  the  ICBM,  1957 


Whinnery:   Then  you  mentioned  the  committees  and  the  consulting  work  on  the 
ICBM,  the  intercontinental  ballistic  missile.   I  was  on  several 
committees  concerned  with  these  and  also  did  consulting  at  the 
Ramo-Wooldridge  Corporation,  before  it  was  TRW,  on  the  system. 
I  wish  such  things  didn't  exist  and  have  often  wondered  if  it 
was  right  to  work  on  them.   But  at  the  time,  with  the  cold  war 
and  the  Soviet  work  on  these  weapons,  it  seemed  necessary. 

Lage:      What  kinds  of  things  did  that  committee  do? 

Whinnery:   As  you  may  remember,  the  first  part  of  the  U.S.  rocket  program 
was  not  very  successful.   We  had  many  failures,  so  the 
committees  looked  at  the  problems  and  considered  different 
designs.   One  of  the  assignments  I  had,  in  my  consulting,  was 
the  propagation  of  radio  waves  through  the  rocket  flame.   It 
turned  out  not  to  be  a  problem  but  there  was  worry  for  a  while 
that  guidance  might  be  lost  because  of  this. 

Lage:      I  see.   But  you  mentioned  that  you  wish  those  devices  weren't 
needed.   Was  this  a  conflict  that  you  had  at  the  time? 

Whinnery:   I  was  pretty  well  convinced  at  the  time  that  it  had  to  be  done, 
and  in  view  of  the  Soviet  work,  I  still  think  so.   But  I  have 
wished  many  times  that  no  one  had  made  these  things. 


196 


NASA  Science  and  Technology  Advisory  Committee  for  the  Apollo 
Program.  196A  to  1969 


Whinnery:   Another  committee  on  the  list  is  the  NASA  [National  Aeronautics 
and  Space  Administration]  STAC,  Science  and  Technology  Advisory 
Committee  for  the  Apollo  Program.   That  was  certainly  one  of  the 
most  interesting  assignments.   First  of  all,  I  had  tremendous 
respect  for  Charlie  Townes  as  chairman  of  that  committee.   He 
asked  good  questions,  always  supportive  to  the  program,  and 
always  let  everybody  on  the  committee  have  their  say.   He  just 
respected  everybody,  both  on  the  committee  and  the  people  that 
we  were  advising,  and  had  good  questions  of  his  own. 

Lage :      Did  the  committee  include  people  opposed  to  the  Apollo  program? 
Whinnery:   No. 

Lage:      I  understand  there  was  a  lot  of  negative  feeling  among 
scientists. 

Whinnery:   I  think  there  were  many  who  thought  that  the  science  that  would 
be  done  wasn't  worth  the  cost  of  the  Apollo  program.   You  have 
to  admit  that  the  program  was  largely  a  political  program.   Our 
prestige  had  fallen  so  low  that  Kennedy  and  his  advisors  felt  we 
had  to  do  something  to  show  that  we  still  could  carry  out  a 
major  program. 

Lage:      There's  even  a  quote  by  Kennedy,  that  somehow  by  having  this 

program  it  would  make  a  difference  to  those  countries  that  were 
deciding  between  freedom  and  tyranny.  They  would  pick  based  on 
who  got  to  the  moon. 

Whinnery:   Sure. 

Lage:      But  the  committee  itself  had  no  dissenters? 

Whinnery:   No.   The  committee  accepted  the  goal  of  the  program  and  tried  to 
advise  on  how  to  accomplish  it.   It  had  quite  a  few  medical 
people  on  it,  because  of  concerns  for  radiation  in  space  and 
weightlessness  and  so  on.   It  was  a  very  strong  committee. 

The  other  person  that  I  admired  very  much  is  George 
Mueller,  the  director  of  the  whole  Apollo  program.  First  of 
all,  he  paid  attention  to  every  suggestion  and  question  that  was 
asked,  and,  secondly,  he  had  an  overall  grasp  of  this 
complicated  program  that  you  just  couldn't  believe.   Sometimes 
he  knew  more  about  the  latest  changes  in  subsystems  than  the 
persons  in  charge  of  those  parts.   He  took  every  question  very, 


197 


very  seriously,  and  had  somebody  analyze  it  if  the  answer  was 
not  clear. 

Lage:      So  the  committee  was  sort  of  a  sounding  board  for  him? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   Jerry  Shepard  and  I  were  the  two  engineers  on  the 

committee.   Of  course  we  commented  on  many  issues,  but  one 
assignment  was  to  follow  the  GE  program  on  reliability  analysis. 
There  were  literally  millions  of  parts  in  the  system,  many  of 
which  would  have  to  have  "five  nines"  reliability  (99,999 
successes  out  of  100,000  tries)  for  the  system  to  have  even  a  50 
percent  chance  of  success.   Normal  approaches  to  reliability 
would  require  testing  of  thousands  of  each  component  and  there 
was  no  way  of  doing  this  with  many  of  the  specialized  units. 
NASA's  approach  was  to  emphasize  and  reemphasize  care  through  a 
"zero-defect"  program.   People  not  involved  can  simply  not 
imagine  the  complexity  of  the  system.   It  seems  almost  a  miracle 
that  it  worked. 

Lage:      It  seems  almost  impossible. 


National  Science  Foundation  Committee  on  Research  Applied  to 
National  Needs  [RANN] 


Whinnery:   Well,  let's  see.   There  were  several  NSF  committees,  but  the 
most  important  was  one  on  applied  research. 

Lage:      Research  Applied  to  National  Needs? 

Whinnery:   Research  Applied  to  National  Needs  was  a  program  in  the  NSF,  and 
the  NSF  director,  [Richard  C.]  Atkinson,  was  convinced  that 
there  had  to  be  some  changes  in  this.   So  he  set  up  a  high-level 
committee  to  advise  on  what  NSF  should  be  doing,  if  anything,  in 
applied  research.   We  had  meetings  for  two  or  three  years.   We 
submitted  a  report,  and  they  made  some  changes.   Not  all  of  our 
suggestions  worked  well,  but  it  did  constitute  a  change  in 
direction  for  NSF. 

Lage:      Could  you  describe  what  kind  of  a  change  it  was? 

Whinnery:   Rather  than  have  a  separate  directorate  for  applied  research,  we 
recommended  that  applied  research  be  integrated  with  each  of  the 
programs  and  grow  more  naturally  out  of  the  basic  work.   I  think 
that  still  remains  the  philosophy  as  I  understand  it,  but  the 
particular  office  that  was  set  up  to  encourage  the  integration 
didn't  quite  work. 


198 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


RANN  actually  had  some  very  good  programs.  One  of  the 
problems  was  that  the  very  fact  that  it  was  supposed  to  help  get 
congressional  support,  because  Congress  could  see  something 
useful,  meant  that  the  Congress  tried  to  micromanage  it.   You'd 
report  on  a  program,  and  they'd  say,  "Well,  why  don't  you  do 
this  instead?" 

"And  in  my  state." 

"And  in  my  state,"  of  course,   [laughter] 


National  Academy  of  Sciences  Committee  on  Science  and  Public 
Policy  [COSPUP1,  1970s 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


What  about  the  Committee  on  Science  and  Public  Policy? 
talked  about  it  very  briefly. 


We 


At  the  time  it  was  a  committee  of  the  National  Academy  of 
Sciences  [NAS] .   Its  successor,  I  believe,  reports  to  NAS,  NAE 
[National  Academy  of  Engineering],  and  the  Institute  of 
Medicine.   Its  studies  may  be  assigned  from  one  of  the  boards  of 
directors,  or  may  be  self -generated,  but  are  supposed  to  be 
concerned  with  major  issues  of  science  and  technology  relating 
to  public  policy.   Melvin  Calvin,  of  our  Chemistry  Department, 
chaired  the  committee  for  many  years,  followed  by  Israel  Singer, 
a  distinguished  mathematician  from  MIT.   One  of  the  studies  had 
to  do  with  safety  issues  related  to  nuclear  energy.   There  had 
been  many  studies  of  that  issue,  with  different  conclusions,  and 
it  was  hoped  to  have  something  more  definitive. 

Did  you  come  up  with  a  report  recommending  changes  in  public 
policy? 

A  tremendous  amount  of  time  was  spent  on  this  issue  and  many 
drafts  of  the  report  were  written,  but  I  don't  think  the  report 
was  submitted  by  the  time  I  left  the  committee.   I  think  it 
mainly  showed  us  how  difficult  it  was  to  obtain  reliable 
estimates  of  risks. 

That  seems  like  a  really  controversial  area. 
Usually  the  issues  were  somewhat  controversial. 

Another  study  of  this  committee  was  that  of  peer  review. 
There  had  been  much  criticism,  particularly  by  Congress,  of  the 
peer  review  system  of  NSF  and  NIH  [National  Institutes  of 


199 


Health],  saying  it  was  just  an  old  boys'  network.   (Now  they'd 
have  to  say  boys'  and  girls'  at  least.)   It  turned  out  that  the 
study  seemed  to  show  that  this  was  not  the  case,  that  in  fact 
some  of  the  established  persons  had  a  harder  time  getting 
grants.   We  didn't  think  that  was  right  either,  but  that  was 
what  the  study  seemed  to  show.   It  did  seem  to  quiet  the 
criticism  of  peer  review  for  a  while,  but  the  issue  still  comes 
up  from  time  to  time. 


Atomic  Energy  Commission  Standing  Committee  on  Controlled 
Thermonuclear  Research,  1970-1973 


Lage:      Here's  another  one:   the  Standing  Committee  on  Controlled 
Thermonuclear  Research  of  the  AEC. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   That  was  probably  my  most  miserable  job  as  a  committee 

member.   Roy  Gould  of  Caltech  was  then  head  of  the  CTR  program, 
Controlled  Thermonuclear  Research.   He  asked  me  to  be  on  his 
advisory  committee,  and  I  told  him  at  first  I  didn't  know  enough 
about  that  field.  He  wanted  somebody  from  the  outside,  but 
really,  you  needed  to  know  quite  a  lot  about  the  specifics  of 
the  fusion  program  to  be  of  use.   The  other  persons  were  expert 
in  the  plasma  field. 

tf 

Whinnery:   Sol  Buchsbaum,  the  chair,  was  especially  good.   He  was  from  the 
Bell  Laboratories,  and  unfortunately  died  last  year.   But  after 
Roy  left,  the  next  director  promptly  fired  me--Bob  Hirsch. 
[laughter]   No,  it  was  a  mutual  agreement  that  I  resign.   I 
didn't  really  feel  I  contributed  what  I  should  have. 


IEEE  Board  of  Directors 


Whinnery:   I  mentioned  to  you  last  time  the  IEEE  [Institute  of  Electrical 
and  Electronics  Engineers].   I  was  on  the  IRE  [Institute  of 
Radio  Engineers)  board  of  directors  early  on  and  then  later  the 
IEEE  board  of  directors,  and  the  IEEE  board  especially  took  a 
lot  of  time. 

Lage:      Did  the  IRE  go  on  to  become  the  IEEE? 


200 


Whinnery:   The  IRE  and  the  American  Institute  of  Electrical  Engineers 
joined  forces  and  became  the  IEEE  in  1963. 

Lage:      On  that  board  of  directors,  what  would  have  been  the  purposes? 

Whinnery:   The  board  of  directors,  as  in  any  organization,  sets  the  policy 
and  makes  decisions.   Some  are  routine  operating  decisions,  but 
new  directions,  and  the  budgeting  for  those,  must  be  considered. 
The  main  issue  during  this  period  was  how  much  the  institute 
should  change  from  being  just  scholarly,  running  conferences  and 
publishing,  to  getting  into  lobbying.   I  think  many  of  us  felt 
that  it  was  a  mistake  to  move  in  that  direction,  but  as  a  matter 
of  fact,  the  institute  did,  and  I  guess  it's  worked  out  all 
right. 

One  of  the  problems  is  that  IEEE  is  an  international 
organization,  and  most  of  the  political  issues  are  national.   So 
they  set  up  a  separate  assessment  for  U.S.  members  and  a  U.S. 
activities  board,  which  does  the  lobbying. 

Lage:      What  were  the  problems  that  needed  lobbying  about? 

Whinnery:   The  main  one,  and  I  think  most  of  us  agreed  that  was  a  serious 

problem,  was  the  question  of  portable  pensions.   The  electronics 
industry  is  so  mobile  that  many  people,  if  not  most,  move  from 
one  company  to  another,  and  they  may  end  up  at  retirement  time 
with  either  no  pension  or  a  trivial  one.   I  don't  believe  the 
problem  is  solved,  but  maybe  it  has  improved  with  the  IEEE 
action.   In  other  issues,  as  that  of  nuclear  power,  there  is  a 
strong  difference  of  opinion  within  the  institute  between  power 
engineers  and  environmentalists.   So  it  would  be  difficult  to 
take  an  IEEE  position  on  this  issue. 

Lage:      Is  lobbying  a  direction  that  a  lot  of  professional  organizations 
have  taken? 

Whinnery:   I  think  so,  yes.   There  are  many  members  who  can't  read  the 

highly  technical  journals.   [laughing]   In  fact,  I'm  getting  so 
I  can't.   So  the  increasing  emphasis  for  education  and  service 
to  the  average  working  member  does  make  sense. 

I'm  not  sure  how  effective  the  U.S.  activities  board 
programs  have  been,  but  the  important  thing  is  that  they  have 
not  ruined  the  technical  information  exchange  aspect  of  the 
institute,  as  many  of  us  feared. 


201 


HAS  Reports  Review  Committee.  1970s- 1980s 


Whinnery:   One  very  well  organized  but  time-consuming  committee  was  the  NAS 
Reports  Review  Committee,  concerned  with  NRC  [National  Research 
Council]  reports.  All  major  NRC  reports,  and  there  are  hundreds 
per  year,  must  be  reviewed.  A  report  is  first  reviewed  by 
experts  in  the  field,  and  the  authoring  committee  makes 
revisions,  trying  to  meet  the  reviewers'  criticisms  or 
suggestions.   A  member  of  the  reports  review  committee  acts  as  a 
monitor,  deciding  if  the  revisions  meet  all  the  valid 
criticisms.   The  process  is  time  consuming  because  you  must  read 
the  reports,  the  reviews,  and  then  carry  on  correspondence  if 
more  revisions  are  necessary. 

Lage:      Who  was  generating  the  original  reports? 

Whinnery:   The  various  boards  and  committees  of  the  National  Research 

Council.   Most  of  the  studies  are  at  government  request,  but 
some  are  initiated  within  the  academies. 

Lage:      Why  was  this  needed  instead  of  a  usual,  say,  scholarly  review  of 
published  articles?   Couldn't  it  have  been  done  in  the  same  way? 

Whinnery:   The  first  stage  with  peer  reviewers  is  very  much  the  same.   I 
suppose  the  reports  review  monitors  are  acting  much  like  the 
editor  of  a  journal,  in  deciding  if  the  authors  have  met 
reviewers'  criticisms.   Although  the  Academy  Press  has  editors, 
I  suppose  they  need  help  because  of  the  huge  volume  of  reports 
and  the  diverse  subject  matter. 

Lage:      An  incredible  amount  of  demand  on  your  time. 

Whinnery:   Yes,  it  took  a  lot  of  time.   Although  no  longer  on  the 

committee,  I  still  get  some  requests  to  monitor  reports,  but  as 
an  active  member  I  received  three  or  four  a  year.   Some  were 
very  extensive,  as  this  series  of  reports  on  engineering, 
[takes  group  of  reports  from  shelf  and  reads:]   Engineering 
Employment  Characteristics,  Engineering  Graduate  Education  and 
Research,  Engineering  and  Society,  Engineering  Undergraduate 
Education.   That  series  took  a  lot  of  time.   Here's  quite  a 
different  one:  Twin  Trailer  Trucks. 

Lage:      Twin  trailer  trucks?   Did  you  ever  think  you'd  get  into 
reviewing  twin  trailer  trucks? 

Whinnery:   This  largely  had  to  do  with  safety  issues  and  the  interpretation 
of  statistics,  so  it  wasn't  highly  specialized.   But  of  course, 


202 


of  the  twenty  or  so  committee  members,  there  weren't  enough  to 
have  experts  in  every  subject. 


NRC  Committee  on  Photonics 


Whinnery:   Another  NRC  assignment  was  as  chair  of  a  committee  to  make 
recommendations  concerning  the  rapidly  growing  field  of 
photonics,  which  is  the  use  of  optical  devices  to  replace  or 
complement  electronic  devices.   It  was  an  excellent  and  hard 
working  committee,  with  Venky  Narayanamurti  (now  dean  at  UC 
Santa  Barbara)  as  vice  chair  and  such  persons  as  Tom 
Giallorenzo,  Stuart  Personick,  and  Fred  Leonberger  on  the 
committee.   It  was  only  a  one-year  study,  so  we  had  to  limit  the 
scope,  but  the  report  was  widely  read  and  quoted.   Not  all  the 
recommendations  were  adopted,  but  I  think  it  had  a  useful 
effect. 


Department  of  Defense: 
Board.  1966-1968 


Ramo  Task  Force  of  the  Defense  Science 


Lage: 


Here's  one  I  want  to  talk  about:   the  Ramo  Task  Force  of  the 
Defense  Science  Board  to  Study  the  U.S.  Technical-Military 
Posture  for  Limited  Warfare  circa  1980.   Is  that  an  important 
one? 


Whinnery:   Well,  it  was  an  interesting  one.   It  had,  in  addition  to  Ramo  as 
chair,  Edward  Teller  and  other  interesting  people.   Ramo's 
approach  was  to  take  a  limited  topic  and  discuss  it  at  one  or 
two  meetings,  and  then  write  a  short  paper  to  the  DOD  director 
with  recommendations. 

Lage:      Was  there  concern  that  there  was  not  being  enough  done  to 
prepare  for  limited  warfare? 

Whinnery:  Yes.   I  don't  know  exactly  who  proposed  the  study  other  than  it 
came  out  of  the  Defense  Science  Board.   I  presume  it  was  felt 
that  too  much  emphasis  had  gone  into  the  large-scale  threat  of 
atomic  war.  We  looked  at  new  technology  and  its  usefulness  for 
more  limited  engagements. 

Lage:      Somehow  I  always  think  of  Edward  Teller  as  thinking  of  this  big 
picture,  the  large-scale  war.  Was  he  active  in  this  committee? 


203 


Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   The  interaction  we  had  was  on  lasers.   I  was  more 

interested  in  them  for  communication  and  surveillance  purposes, 
and  he  for  high-power  weaponry.   I  suppose  he  was  thinking  ahead 
to  the  Star  Wars  concept. 

Lage:      How  was  Ramo  as  the  chair  of  a  committee  like  this? 

Whinnery:   He's  very  competent.   There's  quite  a  different  style  than  that 
of  Townes,  but  he  certainly  let  everyone  have  their  say.   He 
liked  to  wrap  things  up  after  a  reasonable  discussion  and  get  on 
to  something  else. 

Lage:      Would  you  have  written  up  something  having  to  do  with  lasers  and 
communication? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  I  wrote  something.   It  was  mostly  concerned  with  the 
thermal  lens  effect  in  the  atmosphere  and  its  effects  on 
propagation  of  laser  beams.   It  is  a  limitation  for  some 
applications. 


University-Visiting  Committees 


Lage:      Any  others  that  you  want  to  mention? 

Whinnery:   The  visiting  committees  to  universities  are  slightly  different. 
One  of  the  advantages  of  those  is  that  you  get  a  view  of  what 
other  universities  are  doing. 

Lage:      For  whom  did  you  do  this? 

Whinnery:   I  was  on  the  visiting  committee  for  electrical  engineering  at 

MIT,  and  for  engineering  in  general  at  Caltech,  Stanford,  Yale, 
USC,  Harvard,  and  in  the  University  [of  California]  itself, 
Davis  and  San  Diego. 

Lage:      Is  this  by  request  of  the  institution? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  for  those  I  mentioned.   The  other  kind  of  visiting 
committees  are  for  accreditation.   University  of  Hawaii, 
Cornell,  Utah  were  the  ones  where  I  was  part  of  an  accrediting 
team. 

Lage:      Do  you  take  a  different  approach  depending  on  which  type  of 
assignment  you're  on? 


204 


Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 

Lage: 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage  : 
Whinnery: 
Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Yes.   For  those  where  you're  invited  by  the  institution,  the 
institution  sets  the  agenda.   For  the  accrediting  committees, 
you  try  to  dig  into  the  whole  program  and  decide  if  they  should 
be  accredited  or  not.   You  may  make  some  recommendations  of 
things  to  change  and  give  a  limited  accreditation. 

Did  that  happen  on  any  of  the  ones  you  were  involved  in? 

Yes.   The  University  of  Hawaii,  and  that  was  not  a  surprise  to 
them.   It  was  their  first  attempt  to  be  accredited,  and  I  think 
they  appreciated  the  suggestions.   In  some  cases,  the  deans  want 
strong  criticism  so  they  can  take  it  to  their  chancellor  or 
president  and  say,  "Look,  we  have  got  to  have  more  resources." 

You  certainly  went  to  some  of  the  top  schools  to  look  at  their 
programs.   What  reaction  did  you  have? 

Certainly  for  MIT,  Caltech,  Stanford,  I  was  very  much  impressed 
with  the  programs.   In  many  cases,  they  had  specific  issues  that 
they  wanted  advice  on.   I  think,  in  all  those  cases,  they  tried 
to  take  the  advice  seriously. 

Is  there  a  lot  of  sense  of  cooperation  between  the  various 
universities?  Or  is  there  sort  of  a  competitive  underpinning? 


Well,  it's  friendly  competition, 
of  cooperation. 


But  there  certainly  is  a  lot 


How  about  a  program  like  USC? 
engineering  school? 


Is  that  a  very  well-regarded 


It  has  been  built  up  and  was  rated  within  the  top  twenty  in 
recent  U.S.  News  and  World  Report  rankings.   They  do  feel  the 
competition  from  publicly  supported  schools  but  do  have  some  top 
programs  —  the  optics  program,  for  example.   They  have  strong 
part-time  and  evening  programs. 

So  they  serve  some  of  the  working  engineers. 

Yes. 

Okay.   Any  other  comments  along  those  lines? 

Harvard  and  Yale  were  different  in  that  they  were  basically 
applied  science  programs.   Both  had  some  excellent  people  but 
one  of  the  issues  at  the  time  was  whether  they  should  even  keep 
their  engineering  accreditation.  The  president  of  Yale,  Kingman 
Brewster,  had  written  articles  questioning  whether  engineering 


205 


belonged  in  a  major  university.   So  there  was  a  severe  morale 
problem  at  Yale.   There  is  now  a  strong  effort  to  build  the 
program  up. 

Lage:      Did  you  notice  differences  in  university  governance  at  these 
various  schools? 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   Harvard  in  particular  is  almost  unique.   They  have  a 
saying,  "Every  tub  on  its  own  bottom,"  meaning  that  each  school 
is  supposed  to  raise  its  money  and  have  a  lot  of  independence 
with  the  money  that  it  raises.   I  don't  know  exactly  how  the 
finances  work  when  they  participate  in  general  education,  but  I 
think  it  has  to  do  with  student  credit-hours.   They've  got  some 
marvelous  people  in  individual  slots,  but  there  are  very  few 
programs  that  would  belong  with  the  top  half  dozen.   1  guess 
applied  mechanics  would  be  one,  solid  state  maybe  another. 


More  on  NASA  and  Apollo 


Lage:      I've  wondered  if  there  was  more  to  say  about  your  NASA 

experience,  specifically  about  the  aftermath  of  the  fire  on  the 
launching  pad.   Was  the  committee  involved  in  reviewing 
mistakes? 

Whinnery:   Yes.   The  main  mistake  was  in  having  so  much  flammable  material 
inside  the  capsule,  with  a  concentrated  oxygen  atmosphere. 
Certainly  the  management  recognized  and  corrected  that 
immediately. 

Lage:      That  was  one  you  might  have  wished  you'd  gotten  to  before. 

Whinnery:   Yes.   In  fact,  I  remember  their  telling  us  how  great  it  was  that 
they  had  discovered  the  usefulness  of  Velcro.   They  could  use 
Velcro  to  fix  things  that  would  otherwise  float  around  in  the 
zero-gravity  environment.   But  I  guess  no  one  realized  the 
flammability  of  Velcro. 

Lage:      Oh,  I  didn't  realize  that. 

Whinnery:   A  related  issue  was  the  escape  mechanism  for  the  astronauts  in 

case  of  emergency.   For  Gemini  there  had  been  a  slide  cable  from 
the  capsule  to  the  ground  but  the  huge  Titan  rocket  seemed  too 
tall  for  this  so  that  there  was  only  the  elevator.   I  think  a 
cable  was  later  installed  but  never  used.   In  any  event,  it 
wouldn't  have  been  helpful  for  this  accident  since  the 
astronauts  never  got  out  of  the  capsule. 


206 


Lage:  It  seemed  like  there  was  lots  of  criticism  of,  in  quotes,  "NASA 
engineers."  Did  you  feel  it  was  a  well-run  program? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  I  think  the  success  of  this  incredibly  complex  program 

answers  that.  Of  course  we  had  some  worries  along  the  way.   I 
think  the  one  which  bothered  us  most  was  the  moon  lander,  when 
we  saw  it  at  Grumman.   It  was  built  to  withstand  lunar  gravity 
and  not  earth  gravity,  so  it  looked  like  a  very  flimsy  thing. 
Of  course,  it  had  to  be  of  low  weight  in  order  to  be  carried  in 
the  rockets,  but  we  looked  at  it  and  said,  "Gee,  is  that  really 
going  to  hold  the  astronauts?" 

Lage:  Did  you  review  the  decision  to  make  the  landing?  Weren't  there 
questions  about,  should  we  make  the  landing  now  or  should  we  do 
some  more  circumlunar  flights,  or  do  you  remember  any  of  that? 

Whinnery:   I  don't  remember  any  special  controversy  in  the  committee  about 
that.   By  that  time  we  had  a  lot  of  confidence  in  the  NASA  team. 
One  of  the  big  worries  was  the  characteristic  of  the  ground  on 
the  moon.   There  was  something  strange  about  the  reflections 
from  the  moon,  so  Tommy  Gold  of  Cornell  believed  that  there 
might  be  a  huge  layer  of  dust,  and  that  the  landers  would  sink 
down  in  the  dust.   So  there  were  orbiters  taking  close-up 
pictures  of  the  moon,  and  eventually  unmanned  landers  to  settle 
that  issue. 

One  of  my  worries  was  the  period  of  about  an  hour  and  a 
half  when  the  lunar  orbiter  was  behind  the  moon  and  out  of 
communication.   I  proposed  a  relay  satellite  to  eliminate  this 
blackout  period  but  it  was  decided  not  to  be  necessary.   So  far 
as  I  know,  that  didn't  prove  to  be  a  problem.   George  Mueller 
took  all  committee  questions  seriously,  and  often  had  a  Bell 
Labs  group  (Bellcore)  supplement  the  NASA  analyses  on  these 
proposals. 

II 

Lage:      It  sounds  like  a  very  good  use  of  an  outside  committee,  as 
you're  describing  it.  Did  you  get  to  go  and  watch  the 
launchings? 

Whinnery:   The  committee  did  go  to  some  of  them,  but  I  left  the  committee 
before  the  completion  of  the  Apollo  program,  and  did  not  go. 
The  committee  had  moved  on  to  the  next  phase  after  Apollo, 
concerned  with  manned  flights  to  Mars,  which  is  still  an  issue, 
and  a  manned  grand  tour  to  several  planets.   So  the  work  of  the 
committee  for  Apollo  was  really  finished. 


Lage: 


Before  the  actual  landing  on  the  moon? 


207 


Whinnery:   Yes. 

Lage:      But  still,  it  must  have  made  you  feel  so  involved  in  that. 

Whinnery:   Oh,  yes.   And  nervous,  particularly  after  being  involved  in  the 
reliability  study. 

Lage:      Yes,  I  would  think  so.   I  know  there  were  a  lot  of  questions 
about  whether  so  much  research  money  and  government  funding 
should  go  into  this  one  purpose.   Did  you  feel  that  it  advanced 
the  science  in  your  field  at  all,  or  detracted  from  it? 

Whinnery:   The  science  was  primarily  lunar  science.   For  persons  interested 
in  the  moon,  it  was  a  tremendous,  unique  experience. 

Lage:      But  what  about  communication? 

Whinnery:   I  think  in  terms  of  communications  and  systems  work,  it 

certainly  was  sophisticated  enough  that  it  advanced  that  field. 
Whether  it  was  cost-effective  or  not  is  another  question.   As  we 
said  before,  it  was  really  a  political  program  and  in  that 
sense,  it  was  successful. 


National  Research  Council  Telecommunications  Committee,  1974- 
1976 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


I'd  like  you  to  comment  on  a  committee  that  was  worthless, 
[laughs]   You  mentioned  there  were  several. 

Okay.   I'll  tell  you  one  that  I  think  was  nearly  worthless  —  the 
Telecommunications  Committee  of  the  National  Research  Council. 
I  say  nearly,  because  the  useful  part  was  in  getting  together 
persons  from  different  government  agencies  concerned  with 
communications.   In  that  way  they  could  exchange  ideas, 
coordinate  programs,  and  avoid  duplication  much  as  in  the 
Advisory  Group  on  Electron  Devices  we  discussed  previously.   But 
the  industrial  people  on  the  committee  didn't  want  to  tell  their 
future  plans  with  their  competitors  on  the  committee. 

So  that  just  didn't  work. 


That  made  it  very  difficult  to  have  a  clear  view  of  future 
trends.   The  other  problem  was  that  the  chairman,  a 
distinguished  and  charming  person,  didn't  like  controversy, 
when  a  strong  disagreement  arose  between  members  of  the 


So 


208 


committee,  he  tried  to  show  that  there  wasn't  really  a 
difference  of  opinion  when  in  fact  there  was. 

Lage:      So  is  the  quality  of  the  chairman  important? 
Whinnery:   Yes,  tremendously  important. 

Lage:      It  seems  like  it,  from  what  you've  described  as  a  successful 
committee.   How  do  you  bring  it  all  together,  when  you're 
chairing  a  committee  and  you  have  these  divisive  points  of  view? 

Whinnery:   You  certainly  let  the  views  be  expressed  and  hope  that  the 
discussion  brings  some  agreement,  or  if  not,  at  least  a 
clarification  of  the  issues.   But  it  often  gets  repetitious,  and 
sometimes  heated,  so  that  you  have  to  think  of  some  mechanism  to 
stop  that  particular  interchange.   If  it's  an  important  issue, 
you  may  appoint  a  subcommittee,  and  if  not,  time  may  take  care 
of  it.   One  thing  I  found  terribly  important  is  summarizing  at 
the  end  of  each  meeting  the  points  of  agreement,  the  issues 
remaining,  and  the  work  to  be  done  before  the  next  meeting. 


Service  on  Industry  Advisory  Boards 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery ; 


Have  you  been  on  boards  of  directors  for  industry  at  all? 

Yes.   I  was  on  a  board  of  directors  for  Granger  Associates, 
which  is  now  Digital  Switch  Corporation.   The  most  interesting 
board  was  a  science  advisory  committee  to  Allied  Corporation, 
which  is  now  Allied  Signal.  Their  research  laboratories  had 
some  very  interesting  work,  the  work  on  tunable  lasers,  the 
first  Alexandrite  lasers,  metallic  glasses,  conducting  polymers 
--quite  a  number  of  things. 

But  probably  the  key  to  it  was  the  nature  of  the  committee. 
John  Brauman  from  Stanford,  Mildred  Dresselhaus  of  MIT,  Sir  Sam 
Edwards  of  Cambridge  University,  Jim  Krumhansl  of  Cornell,  and 
Jeremy  Knowles  of  Harvard  were  all  outstanding  people.   As  in 
other  committees,  the  quality  of  the  people  you  serve  with  makes 
the  experience  so  valuable  and  enjoyable. 

Is  it  different  serving  on  an  industry  advisory  board  versus  a 
government? 

Not  terribly.  It's  really  the  people  you're  dealing  with  that 
make  the  difference  from  one  committee  to  another.  Of  course, 
the  goals  of  industrial  and  governmental  organizations  are 


209 

different.   The  value  of  service  on  an  industrial  board  for  a 
university  person  is  to  have  a  better  view  of  the  goals  and 
problems  of  industry. 

Lage:      Are  there  other  committees  you  think  we  should  talk  about? 
Whinnery:   There  are  many  others,  but  I  think  that's  enough. 


210 


XI   FAMILY  LIFE  AND  LEISURE 


Lage:      I  had  the  reaction,  looking  at  your  bio-bib  and  all  you've  done, 
how  did  you  have  a  family  life  and  any  leisure  life? 

Whinnery:   After  I  saw  this  on  the  list  of  things  you  wanted  to  talk  about, 
I  thought  back  and  decided  it  may  not  have  been  fair  to  the 
family.  With  all  the  committees  and  professional  conferences 
there  were  too  many  trips.  And  of  course,  the  university  job  is 
more  than  a  forty-hour  week  commitment.  But  I  did  try  to  save  a 
part  of  each  weekend,  when  I  was  home,  to  do  something  with  the 
family.   We  have  three  daughters,  and  an  arrangement  we  had  for 
a  while  was  for  them  to  take  turns  picking  what  we  should  do. 
It  might  be  a  picnic,  a  trip  to  the  ocean,  the  zoo,  a 
restaurant,  to  Fairyland  by  Lake  Merritt,  or  something  like 
that. 

Lage:      Did  you  have  dinner  with  the  family  usually? 

Whinnery:   There  were  of  course  quite  a  few  dinner  meetings  in  connection 
with  my  work,  but  I  tried  to  get  home  for  dinner  whenever 
possible,  and  to  have  some  time  with  the  family  before  getting 
to  work  a  few  hours  before  bedtime.   When  the  girls  were  little, 
I  read  them  stories,  some  of  which  I  made  up.   I  do  want  to  say 
how  supportive  my  wife,  Pat,  was  in  all  this.   Sometimes  she  had 
to  take  care  of  a  few  crises  while  I  was  away.  One  was  a  big 
storm  that  brought  mud  all  over  our  driveway  and  garage. 

Lage:      And  she'd  have  to  take  care  of  that,  plus  all  the  children. 

Whinnery:   She  had  to  take  care  of  that.   She  was  also  supportive  in  all 

the  moves  that  we  made.   We  discussed  them,  but  I  don't  remember 
any  time  where  she  argued  against  a  particular  decision. 

Lage:      Has  she  had  a  particular  area  of  interest  or  activities  in  her 
own  life?  She  didn't  work,  I'm  assuming. 


211 


Whinnery : 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 

Whinnery: 

Lage: 

Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


Lage: 
Whinnery: 


She  worked  at  GE;  that's  where  we  met. 
Right,  but  I  mean  after  the  family- 
She  has  a  farm  in  Iowa  which  she  manages  with  the  help  of  a 
local  manager  there.   She  has  a  number  of  hobbies.   She  used  to 
play  the  violin,  but  she  gave  that  up  when  she  didn't  practice 
enough,  and  couldn't  stand  the  result.   Golf  and  bridge  are  two 
of  her  favorites. 


Those  are  very  rewarding, 
are  grown? 

Yes. 


Tell  me  about  your  daughters .   They 


Lage: 


What  directions  have  they  gone  in? 

Carol,  the  eldest,  works  for  Northrup  in  budgeting  and 
scheduling.   She  was  a  psychology  major,  and  she  worked  with 
emotionally  disturbed  kids  for  several  years—very  tough  job, 
with  autistic  and  schizophrenic  kids.   When  the  budget  cuts  came 
and  a  lot  of  these  places  had  to  let  people  go,  she  was  out  of  a 
job.   It  turned  out  a  nephew-in-law  who  was  working  at  Northrup 
suggested  she  come  in  and  apply  for  a  job  there,  which  she  did. 
She's  been  there  fifteen  years  or  maybe  more. 

That  was  a  big  career  change. 
Yes. 

The  middle  daughter,  Cathy,  is  an  M.D.  She  got  her  M.D. 
degree  at  Michigan  State  and  practices  in  El  Cerrito  with  two 
other  doctors. 

In  what  specialty? 

Family  practice.   She  has  two  girls,  ten  and  fourteen. 

Our  youngest  daughter,  Barbara,  is  an  actress.   Her  best 
role,  financially  anyway,  was  in  "St.  Elsewhere."  For  three 
years,  she  was  on  that  pretty  regularly.   She  was  Dr.  Cathy 
Martin,  a  pathologist.   She  has  been  on  "Matlock,"  "Murder,  She 
Wrote,"  "Jake  and  the  Fatman,"  and  just  last  week  was  on  Dick 
Van  Dyke's  new  program,  "Diagnosis  Murder."   She  loves  the 
theater,  but  some  of  the  plays  she  has  been  in  are  what  they 
call  "showcase"--no  pay.   It  is  a  tough  business. 

Yes,  but  if  you're  really  devoted,  you're  just  happy  to  be 
working  in  the  field.   That's  the  impression  I  get. 


212 


Whinnery:   That's  right. 

Lage:      Anything  else  to  say  about  family  life?   It  sounds  like  you  did 
very  well  managing,  as  much  as  possible. 

Whinnery:   I  don't  know.   Of  course  I'm  prejudiced,  but  I  think  them  all 
wonderful  people.   The  nice  thing  is  that  the  girls  are  good 
friends  and  enjoy  each  other  so  much. 

Lage:      Do  they  have  similar  interests?  Do  they  all  enjoy  similar 
activities? 

Whinnery:   There  are  many  interests  in  common,  but  some  differences.   We 
used  to  take  the  family  to  plays  and  musical  events,  including 
the  opera.   When  Carol  left  home,  the  other  two  pointed  out, 
"You  don't  have  to  take  us  to  opera  any  more,  we  don't  really 
like  that."   [laughter]   Why  they  didn't  mention  it  before,  I 
don't  know. 

Lage:      What  about  outdoors?   I  know  you  did  a  lot  of  going  to  the  beach 
and--? 

Whinnery:   Yes,  they  all  love  the  ocean,  hiking,  and  other  outdoor 

activities.   We  did  a  lot  of  camping  when  the  girls  were  home. 
We  also  went  skiing  several  times  each  winter,  and  Cathy  and 
Barbara  still  do.   All  play  tennis  a  bit,  and  Carol  likes  golf 
but  mostly  plays  just  when  she's  visiting  here. 

Lage:      Nobody  followed  along  in  the  engineering  field? 

Whinnery:   No.   Both  Carol  and  Cathy  were  interested  in  science  when  they 

were  in  junior  high  and  the  beginning  of  high  school,  but 

whether  it  was  that  they  had  some  better  teachers  in  other 

fields  or  something  else,  they  both  changed. 

Lage:      How  old  are  the  girls  now?  The  women?   [laughter] 
Whinnery:   Carol  was  born  in  '46,  Cathy  in  '49,  and  Barbara  in  '53. 

Lage:      Well,  I  think  we've  done  an  admirable  job  covering  all  the  many 
facets  of  your  career  and  the  College  of  Engineering. 

Whinnery:   I  think  we  took  too  much  time  on  me  and  not  enough  on  the 
college,  but-- 

Lage:      Not  at  all.   It  has  really  been  a  pleasure  for  me  to  record  this 
oral  history  with  you. 


Transcribed  and  Final  Typed  by  Shannon  Page 


213 


TAPE  GUIDE--John  R.  Whinnery 


[Interview  1:  January  19,  1994] 

Tape  1,  Side  A 

Tape  1,  Side  B 

Tape  2,  Side  A 

Tape  2,  Side  B  not  recorded 

[Interview  2:  January  26,  1994] 

Tape  3,  Side  A 

Tape  3,  Side  B 

Tape  4,  Side  A 

Tape  4,  Side  B 


[Interview  3: 
Tape  5, 


February  9,  1994] 
Side  A 


Tape  5,  Side  B 
Tape  6,  Side  A 
Tape  6,  Side  B  not  recorded 


[Interview  4: 
Tape  7, 
Tape  7, 
Tape  8 


February  16,  1994] 
Side  A 
Side  B 
Side  A 


Tape  8,  Side  B  not  recorded 

[Interview  5:  March  2,  1994] 
Tape  9,  Side  A 
Tape  9,  Side  B 
Tape  10,  Side  A 
insert  from  Tape  11,  Side  A 
resume  Tape  10,  Side  A 
Tape  10,  Side  B 

[Interview  6:  March  16,  1994] 

Tape  11,  Side  A 

Tape  11,  Side  B 

Tape  12,  Side  A 

Tape  12,  Side  B 

[Interview  7:  March  23,  1994] 

Tape  13,  Side  A 

Tape  13,  Side  B 

Tape  14,  Side  A 

Tape  14,  Side  B  not  recorded 


1 

13 
25 


34 
45 
56 

67 


69 
79 

90 


100 
110 
121 


131 
141 
151 
152 
155 
163 


164 
170 
179 
188 


190 
199 
206 


214 


APPENDICES--John  R.  Whinnery 


A.  "Growth  of  the  College  of  Engineering,"  draft  essay 
prepared  by  John  Whinnery  for  inclusion  in  Clark 
Kerr's  in-process  memoir,  The  Gold  and  the  Blue — A 
Personal  Memoir  of  the  University  of  California, 
Part  I:   First  Chancellor  at  Berkeley,  1952-1958 

(proposed  title).  215 

B.  Selected  Poems  by  John  R.  Whinnery  228 

C.  Curriculum  Vitae  and  Publications  List  252 


215 


Appendix  A 
GROWTH  OF  THE  COLLEGE  OF  ENGINEERING1 

This  history  will  concentrate  on  the  growth  of  engineering  at 
Berkeley  during  the  decade  of  the  fifties,  with  emphasis  on  the  period  of 
Clark  Kerr's  chancellorship.   It  was  a  period  of  rapid  growth,  especially 
in  reputation  of  the  college,  as  will  be  seen.   In  order  to  place  this 
period  in  context,  it  will  be  desirable  to  give  some  antecedents  to  this 
period,  especially  with  respect  to  the  immediate  postwar  period,  and  some 
sequel. 

Engineering  education  in  the  U.S.  before  World  War  II  was  largely  an 
undergraduate  enterprise.   It  was  that  way  at  Berkeley,  with  a  highly 
dedicated  staff  of  teachers,  several  master's  students,  an  occasional 
Ph.D.,  and  only  a  few  research  projects  which  generally  had  to  be  carried 
out  on  a  spare-time  basis.  MIT,  Caltech,  and  a  few  other  schools 
produced  the  majority  of  the  engineering  doctorates  of  the  country.  The 
average  number  of  U.S.  engineering  doctorates  over  the  period  1912  to 
1951  was  about  seventy  per  year  (1),  as  compared  with  5424  for  the  year 
1990  (2).  The  major  change  for  engineering  education  came  at  the  end  of 
World  War  II  when  many  ex-GIs,  who  had  experienced  high  technology  in 
their  wartime  assignments,  decided  to  return,  either  to  complete  their 
undergraduate  education  or  to  undertake  graduate  study.  At  the  same  time, 
government  agencies  that  had  profited  from  high  technology,  with  the 
Office  of  Naval  Research  as  leader,  began  to  make  generous  grants  to 
universities  for  research.   These  two  factors,  occurring  together, 
changed  the  character  of  engineering  education  dramatically. 

Following  World  War  II,  Berkeley  took  part  in  the  engineering 
enrollment  crush  and  began  to  share  in  the  federal  research  support.  Its 
College  of  Engineering  was  considered  of  high  quality,  and  some  of  its 
work  (for  example  the  civil  engineering  research  on  concrete)  was  known 
internationally.   Yet  it  is  unlikely  that  it  would  have  been  rated  among 
the  top  ten  engineering  schools  of  the  country  at  that  time.   (No  formal 
rankings  are  available  for  that  period.)   In  the  American  Council  on 
Education  rating  of  university  programs  in  1966,  however,  it  was  rated 
second  only  to  that  at  MIT.  This  paper  explores  some  of  the  ways  in 
which  this  change  came  about.   The  major  architect  of  the  change  was 
Morrough  P.  O'Brien,  dean  of  the  college  from  1942  to  1958.   So  a  major 
part  of  this  history  will  be  that  of  O'Brien  during  his  tenure  as  dean  of 
engineering  at  Berkeley,  a  story  which  has  been  told  briefly  in  other 
tributes  (3-5). 


'Draft  essay  prepared  by  John  Whinnery  for  inclusion  in  Clark  Kerr's 
in-process  memoir,  The  Gold  and  the  Blue--A  Personal  Memoir  of  the 
University  of  California,  Part  I:   First  Chancellor  at  Berkeley, 
1952-1958  (proposed  title). 


'  t 


216 


In  reviewing  O'Brien's  accomplishments,  one  becomes  especially 
impressed  by  his  grasp  of  the  overall  nature  of  higher  education  and  the 
necessity  to  improve  all  aspects  in  order  to  become  first  rate.   Thus  we 
will  see  his  emphasis  on  improvement  of  faculty  quality,  student  quality, 
revised  curriculum,  and  on  administrative  arrangements  necessary  to  bring 
about  the  needed  changes.  Lest  this  appear  to  be  merely  an  exercise  in 
hero  worship,  it  should  be  made  clear  that  many  others  played  key  roles 
in  the  evolution  of  the  college,  and  that  O'Brien  made  some  mistakes. 
But  no  one  who  studies  that  period  can  doubt  the  importance  of  his 
imprint  on  the  changes.   The  support  and  inspiration  from  President 
Sproul  in  the  first  part  of  his  period  as  dean,  and  from  Chancellor  Kerr 
during  the  latter  part  of  that  period,  were  essential  in  the  development 
of  the  college. 

FACULTY  IMPROVEMENT:   In  reading  O'Brien's  oral  history  (6),  it  seems 
clear  that  improvement  of  faculty  quality  was  one  of  his  first  goals. 
Certainly  a  high  quality  faculty  is  essential  for  a  high  quality  program. 
He  describes  his  personal  efforts  in  recruiting  such  persons  as  John 
Dorn,  one  of  our  outstanding  materials  scientists,  Sam  Schaaf,  a 
mathematician  who  made  major  contributions  to  low-pressure  aerodynamics, 
Earl  Parker,  who  was  later  to  receive  the  National  Medal  of  Science,  and 
Henry  Schade,  who  would  build  the  outstanding  Naval  Architecture  program 
at  Berkeley.  Around  1950  he  set  up  a  confidential  screening  committee 
within  the  college  to  advise  him  on  cases  of  appointment  or  promotion 
submitted  by  the  departments.   Persons  of  the  quality  of  Dorn,  Parker  and 
Sam  Silver,  who  would  later  head  the  Space  Sciences  Laboratory,  were 
asked  to  serve  on  the  committee.   It  set  very  high  standards  for 
appointment  and  promotion,  and  for  the  preparation  of  the  case  material 
to  be  submitted. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  many  of  the  persons  listed  above  came  with 
backgrounds  in  science  or  mathematics.   This  was  a  surprise  to  many  since 
O'Brien  always  emphasized  the  difference  between  engineering  and  the 
sciences,  noting  that  the  primary  function  of  engineering  is  design, 
while  that  of  science  is  discovery.   But  he  also  emphasized  the 
importance  of  science  in  making  new  engineering  approaches  possible,  and 
he  recognized  that  this  strength  needed  to  be  built  up  in  the  college. 
His  goal  was  to  have  a  mix  of  the  two  strengths. 

STUDENT  QUALITY:    Student  quality  is  also  important  for  a  first-rate 
program.   Before  the  institution  of  the  California  Master  Plan  for  Higher 
Education,  many  marginal  students  were  admitted  to  the  University,  who 
had  a  rough  time  with  the  demanding  engineering  majors,  as  did  other 
bright  students  who  had  little  aptitude  for  the  quantitative  aspects  of 
the  program.   Dropout  and  failure  rates  were  high,  and  tremendous  amounts 
of  time  were  spent  advising  or  working  in  office  hours  with  students  who 
would  never  graduate.   O'Brien  saw  this  as  a  major  problem  and  somewhat 
surprisingly  obtained  permission  and  funds  to  institute  screening 


217 


examinations  for  admission  to  the  college  at  the  freshman  level,  and  for 
transfer  to  the  college,  or  continuation  in  it,  at  the  junior  level. 

The  examinations  were  instituted  early  in  his  term  as  dean  and 
continued  until  the  early  sixties  when  the  Berkeley  Academic  Senate  ruled 
them  inconsistent  with  University  policy  on  free  choice  of  major  by  the 
student.   (It  should  be  noted  that  screening  for  individual  majors  is  now 
allowed  on  the  basis  of  program  limitations.)   The  formulation  of  the 
examinations,  their  offering  throughout  the  state,  and  their  evaluation 
constituted  a  tremendous  effort.   According  to  studies  made  by  the 
college,  they  did  improve  student  quality  as  judged  by  grade-point 
averages  and  dropout  rates  but  probably  had  achieved  their  major  purpose 
by  the  time  the  program  was  ended. 

With  better  students,  a  number  of  steps  were  taken  to  improve 
motivation  and  hence  retention.   Most  of  these  steps  will  be  reviewed  in 
the  section  on  curriculum,  but  one  to  be  mentioned  here  is  that  of 
freshman  advising.   Freshmen  were  divided  into  groups  of  about  fifteen, 
and  faculty  members  who  agreed  to  serve  as  advisors  for  one  of  these 
groups  promised  to  meet  with  it  several  times  during  the  year.   Funds 
were  provided  so  that  at  least  one  of  these  meetings  could  be  in  the 
advisor's  home,  or  at  the  Faculty  Club.  Advising  of  all  students  was 
taken  very  seriously  with  essentially  all  faculty  engaged  in  either 
undergraduate  or  graduate  advising. 

CURRICULUM:   During  the  period  of  concern,  freshmen  were  admitted  to  the 
college  without  declaration  of  major.   The  program  for  the  first  two 
years  was  common.  Apart  from  the  ideological  argument  that  students 
should  have  some  time  to  become  acquainted  with  engineering  before  having 
to  make  the  choice  of  major,  there  was  the  practical  matter  of  junior 
transfers  from  the  community  colleges.  These  colleges  typically  had  high 
quality  programs  for  lower  division  science  and  engineering  students  but 
were  small  and  could  not  possibly  offer  courses  for  a  variety  of 
engineering  majors.   The  lower  division  program,  set  partly  by  tradition 
and  partly  by  requirements  of  the  accrediting  agency  (at  that  time,  the 
Engineering  Council  for  Professional  Development)  typically  had  two  years 
of  physics,  a  year  of  chemistry,  two  years  of  math,  a  course  from  the 
humanities  or  social  sciences  each  term  and  an  engineering  course  each 
term.   The  engineering  courses  were  typically  drafting,  surveying, 
analytical  mechanics,  and  an  introduction  to  the  profession. 

O'Brien  believed  very  much  in  the  principle  of  the  common  lower 
division  but  did  not  think  the  specific  engineering  courses  as  they  then 
existed  very  good  for  student  motivation.  He  hoped  to  modernize  the 
subject  matter  and  also  to  involve  more  of  the  departments.   (The  list 
given  above  related  primarily  to  civil  and  mechanical  engineering.) 
After  many  hours  of  faculty  meetings,  four  courses  evolved,  one  for  each 
semester  of  the  lower  division.   The  surveying  course  was  replaced  by  a 


218 


general  measurements  course,  with  electrical  engineering  participating. 
The  drafting  course  was  expanded  to  emphasize  graphical  exposition  and 
problem  solution;  the  mechanics  course  was  modernized  and  an  entirely  new 
course  on  engineering  materials  was  introduced.   This  last  course, 
organized  by  the  excellent  materials  science  faculty,  was  probably  the 
most  successful  and  is  still  required  by  most  of  our  departments.  The 
measurements  course  was  the  least  successful,  mainly  because  it  was  given 
before  students  had  met  the  principles  of  the  physical  systems  to  be 
measured,  or  the  statistical  base  for  measurement  theory.   But  at  least 
there  was  change,  and  the  sense  of  excitement  that  went  with  it. 

The  new  engineering  courses  presented  some  problems  to  the  community 
colleges  but  at  that  time  there  was  a  well-functioning  liaison  apparatus 
with  all  of  these  colleges  that  provided  transfer  students  to  Berkeley. 
They  were  kept  informed,  and  summer  institutes  were  given  in  Berkeley  on 
the  new  course  content.   Clark  Kerr,  in  praising  O'Brien's  relationship 
with  the  community  colleges,  stated,  "While  I  had  hoped  that  what 
engineering  had  done  with  the  community  colleges  in  the  state  might 
become  the  universitywide  pattern  in  other  fields,  the  record  has  been 
greatly  disappointing.   No  one  has  ever  come  close  to  what  was  done  by 
Mike  in  engineering."  (5) 

In  addition  to  his  concern  with  the  engineering  courses  of  the 
curriculum,  O'Brien  spent  a  great  deal  of  time  trying  to  improve  the 
selection  of  courses  in  the  humanities  and  social  sciences  taken  by 
engineering  students.   Accredited  engineering  programs  must  have  20  to  25 
percent  of  the  courses  in  those  fields,  but  they  are  all  too  often  left 
to  random  selection  by  the  students.  Mike  brought  in  consultants  from 
other  universities  —  such  persons  as  John  Burchard,  then  dean  of 
humanities  at  MIT,  and  Phillipe  LeCorbeiller,  who  gave  courses  in  general 
education  at  Harvard.  These  persons  spent  much  time  talking  with  faculty 
members  in  Letters  and  Science  and  helped  draw  up  some  guidelines  for 
selection  and  grouping  of  courses.   Probably  most  innovative  was  a 
special  course  in  the  social  sciences  (Social  Sciences  1A-B) ,  originally 
started  for  engineering  students  by  Lewis  Feuer,  Van  Dusen  Kennedy,  and 
Eugene  Burdick,  but  eventually  popular  with  others.  This  course  used 
original  sources  and  greatly  challenged  the  students.   For  the  first  time 
advisors  found  themselves  engaged  in  arguments  with  students  about  the 
ideas  of  Freud,  Karl  Marx,  and  others.   The  course  was  required  for 
engineering  students  from  1957  to  1964,  but  it  became  difficult  to  find 
teachers  to  replace  the  imaginative  group  that  had  designed  the  course. 
O'Brien,  in  his  oral  history  (p.  143)  blamed  the  termination  on  the 
general  lack  of  respect  for  service  courses. 

Curricula  were  also  begun  in  naval  architecture  and  nuclear 
engineering,  both  later  becoming  distinguished  departments.   (Naval 
architecture  operated  for  several  years  with  only  three  faculty  members, 
which  seemed  absurd  organizationally  to  most  outside  persons,  but  it 


219 


became  world-renowned  and  operated  as  smoothly  as  any  department  of  the 
college.)   A  program  of  process  engineering  was  less  successful.   O'Brien 
first  tried  to  have  chemical  engineering  brought  into  the  college,  as  it 
is  in  many  of  the  universities  of  the  country.  Members  of  that 
distinguished  department  were  quite  happy  within  the  College  of  Chemistry 
and  opposed  the  move.   The  program  of  process  engineering  was  then  set  up 
within  the  college  to  cover  some  of  the  same  processes,  but  was 
considered  as  duplicative  or  competitive  by  the  chemical  engineers  and 
was  terminated  in  1961. 

SPECIAL  PROGRAMS:   Two  special  programs  are  noteworthy.   The  engineering 
science  major  was  instituted  in  1947  with  a  program  in  engineering 
physics.   It  was  an  honors  program  and  an  interdisciplinary  program,  not 
assigned  to  a  single  department  but  with  advisors  in  most  of  the 
engineering  departments  and  in  physics.   It  was  assumed  that  most 
students  in  this  major  would  continue  for  graduate  work,  and  the  program 
was  designed  so  that  they  might  continue  either  in  an  engineering 
department  or  in  physics.  The  program  was  highly  successful  and  has 
since  been  extended  to  engineering  mathematics,  engineering  biology  and 
engineering  geosciences.   There  are  currently  143  students  in  the 
engineering  science  programs,  with  many  highly  qualified  applicants 
turned  away. 

A  second  important  initiative  was  that  of  the  Cooperative  Work-Study 
Program.   The  idea  of  giving  practical  experience  through  work  periods 
interleaved  with  study  periods  was  not  new.  Antioch  College  required 
co-op  experience  of  all  students  and  among  the  engineering  schools  MIT 
was  a  leader.  Because  of  the  success  of  these,  such  a  program  was 
instituted  at  Berkeley.   It  was  very  successful  and  continues  to  be  so. 
It  is  typical  for  the  deans  to  receive  calls  or  visits  from  worried 
parents  of  students  who  have  elected  the  co-op  program.  They  are 
concerned  that  it  might  interfere  with  the  course  work.   Fortunately  the 
data  show  that  a  student's  GPA  generally  goes  up,  not  down,  after  a 
period  in  the  co-op  program,  presumably  because  of  better  motivation. 

THE  MAJOR  INSTITUTES:   Several  important  institutes  were  initiated  in  the 
decade  following  the  war.   Three  of  these,  concerned  with  problems  of 
importance  to  the  state,  were  devoted  to  transportation  and  traffic, 
sanitary  engineering,  and  water  resources.   (The  Institute  of  Engineering 
Research  was  more  of  an  administrative  arm  and  will  be  discussed 
separately.)   Before  discussing  the  specifics  of  these,  it  is  appropriate 
to  say  something  about  O'Brien's  working  style.  He  obviously  had 
tremendous  energy,  and  a  continual  search  for  better  ways  of  doing 
things.   He  traveled  a  great  deal  (always  with  the  proper  leave  forms 
filed,  according  to  his  oral  history.)  On  his  travels  he  engaged  many 
persons  in  discussions  concerning  engineering  in  general  and  engineering 
education  in  particular.   Gordon  Brown  of  MIT,  Harvey  Brooks  of  Harvard, 
Ernst  Weber  of  Brooklyn  Polytechnic  Institute,  Thorndyke  Saville  of  New 


220 


York  University,  George  Hawkins  of  Purdue,  and  C.  W.  (Jim)  LaPierre  of 
the  General  Electric  Company  were  ones  he  especially  sought  out  and  often 
quoted.  Others,  nearer  to  home,  played  a  major  role  through  the 
Engineering  Advisory  Council,  to  be  described  later.  He  also  spent  time 
with  legislators  in  Sacramento  and  found  Senator  Randolph  Collier 
especially  concerned  with  problems  of  the  state  and  anxious  to  enroll  the 
university  in  help  with  these.   This  association  appears  to  have  been 
central  to  the  formation  of  the  transportation  institute  and  possibly 
others . 

The  first  of  the  three  key  institutes  was  that  on  Transportation  and 
Traffic  (now  Institute  of  Transportation  Studies),  formed  in  1947. 
O'Brien  convinced  Banner  Davis  of  civil  engineering  to  direct  the 
institute,  and  it  became  a  leading  center  for  long  range  research  in 
transportation  problems,  but  also  a  close-working  and  highly  regarded 
resource  for  the  traffic  engineers  and  transportation  system  planners  of 
the  state. 

A  second  major  institute  was  the  Sanitary  Engineering  Research 
Laboratory  (now  Sanitary  Engineering  and  Environmental  Health  Research 
Laboratory),  formed  in  1950.   Harold  Gotaas,  then  chairman  of  civil 
engineering,  played  a  major  role  in  setting  up  this  laboratory, 
recognizing  the  growing  importance  of  the  subject  to  the  country  and  the 
need  for  bringing  together  engineers,  biologists  and  chemists.   Percy 
McGauhey  followed  Gotaas  as  director,  and  the  outstanding  faculty  and 
research  personnel  rapidly  made  it  one  of  the  most  innovative  teaching 
and  research  centers  for  sanitary  engineering  in  this  country. 

A  third  example  is  the  Water  Resources  Center,  set  up  by  a  grant  of 
$100,000  in  the  Collier  Bill  of  the  1956  California  legislature.  This  is 
somewhat  different  in  that  it  is  a  universitywide  institution,  and  one 
including  agricultural  and  legal  aspects  of  water  as  well  as  engineering. 
Vice-President  Harry  Wellman  played  a  major  role  in  this  and  was  head  of 
the  committee  appointed  by  President  Sproul  to  plan  the  program  of  the 
center.   Berkeley  engineering  programs  under  the  center  included  sea 
water  conversion,  headed  by  Everett  Howe,  aspects  of  the  hydrology  of 
underground  reservoirs,  and  a  unique  archives  for  literature  and 
unpublished  material  concerning  water  resources  with  emphasis  on 
California  (7). 

FACILITIES:  With  the  growth  of  the  college  and  the  special  projects, 
space  was  a  continuing  problem.  New  engineering  buildings  included  Cory 
Hall,  completed  in  1950,  three  additions  to  the  mechanical  engineering 
laboratories  of  Hesse  Hall  (the  last  of  these  emphasizing  hydraulics  and 
named  after  O'Brien),  and  planning  for  Etcheverry  Hall,  north  of  Hearst 
Avenue,  housing  mechanical,  industrial  and  nuclear  engineering.   An 
example  of  forward-looking  planning  was  in  the  decisions  concerning  Cory 
Hall.   It  was  planned  as  a  four-story  building,  but  the  appropriated 


221 


funds  were  found  insufficient  for  this.   Rather  than  cut  to  three 
stories,  it  was  decided  to  build  with  four,  but  with  the  top  floor 
unfinished.   The  space  was  quickly  needed  and  the  fourth  floor  completed 
in  1958.   (Mezzanines  were  added  later  and  a  fifth  floor  with  offices 
only  in  1986.)   The  total  addition  of  this  on-campus  space  amounted  to 
262,000  assignable  square  feet. 

Important  additions  were  also  made  to  the  Richmond  Field  Station. 
This  had  been  obtained  from  the  former  California  Cap  Company  in  1950  for 
large-scale  projects  that  could  not  be  centered  on  the  campus. 
Transportation  projects,  sanitary  engineering,  spa-water  conversion,  and 
earthquake  engineering  are  examples  of  programs  that  could  not  have 
developed  as  they  did  without  this  facility.   This  property  was  obtained 
for  $750,000  (an  amount  later  recovered  by  sale  of  a  portion  to  the 
Highway  Department).   Some  groups  resisted  the  separation  from  the 
campus,  for  example  the  low-pressure  aerodynamics  group  that  brought  the 
wind  tunnels  back  to  the  campus  once  space  in  Etcheverry  was  available, 
but  those  that  had  projects  of  even  larger  scope  certainly  welcomed  it. 

ADMINISTRATIVE  STRUCTURE:   Perhaps  the  most  controversial  of  O'Brien's 
administrative  arrangements  was  that  of  forming  one  Department  of 
Engineering,  with  himself  as  chairperson.   The  former  departments  became 
divisions.   This  was  done  because  budgets,  faculty  appointments  and 
promotions,  and  many  other  critical  matters  originated  in  department 
offices,  not  in  the  colleges.   It  was  first  of  all  somewhat  confusing. 
Colleagues  have  told  of  calling  for  an  appointment  with  the  dean,  and 
when  asked  about  the  subject  of  concern,  were  told  that  this  was  a 
department  matter  and  he  would  have  to  call  that  office  for  the 
appointment.   More  importantly,  it  became  intolerable  to  the  departments 
as  they  became  strong,  but  it  was  an  important  arrangement  during  the 
building  phase  of  the  college.   The  arrangement  was  terminated  in  1958. 

When  the  divisions  again  became  departments,  O'Brien  saw  three  of 
these,  civil,  mechanical,  and  electrical,  as  too  big  for  ideal  department 
size  and  convinced  the  first  two  to  form  divisions  within  the 
departments.   The  divisions  of  civil  were  structural  engineering, 
transportation  and  traffic,  and  sanitary  engineering,   These  worked  well 
through  most  of  their  history.  Mechanical  divided  into  heat  power,  aero, 
applied  mechanics,  and  engineering  design.   There  was  less  harmony  here, 
especially  between  the  design-oriented  and  theoretically-oriented 
segments  of  the  department,  and  in  1973  the  separate  divisions  were 
abandoned.  Even  in  civil  engineering  the  divisions  were  felt  to  be 
somewhat  artificial,  as  more  and  more  interdisciplinary  projects  grew  and 
somewhat  duplicative  in  administrative  matters,  so  were  given  up  in  1986. 
Electrical  engineering  was  invited  to  consider  the  matter  of  divisions 
also,  and  there  did  appear  to  be  some  advantages  in  this  because  of  the 
matter  of  size,  but  the  EE  faculty  was  opposed.   It  now  seems  fortunate 
that  there  was  not  a  division.   So  many  of  the  innovations  in  EE  have 


222 


come  from  work  that  at  first  seemed  separate  (communications  and  control, 
for  example).   This  cooperation  might  have  happened  anyway,  but  probably 
not  as  easily. 

The  Institute  of  Engineering  Research  has  already  been  mentioned. 
This  was  formed  to  help  faculty  make  contact  with  potential  support 
agencies,  and  to  give  help  with  budgets,  writing  of  proposals,  and  other 
administrative  matters.   It  was  especially  helpful  in  the  early  stages  of 
sponsored  research  as  all  the  faculty  had  to  learn  the  interests  of  the 
growing  number  of  support  agencies  and  the  ways  to  approach  them.   Henry 
Schade  was  its  first  distinguished  director.   Earl  Parker  and  George 
Maslach  followed  and  gave  special  emphasis  to  helping  the  young  faculty 
members  get  started  in  research. 

There  was  reorganization  within  the  college  offices,  with  very 
effective  associate  deans  (Everett  Howe  and  Clyne  Garland  among  others) 
and  assistant  deans  for  graduate  matters,  undergraduate  matters,  and  for 
the  work-study  program.  The  Engineering  Advisory  Council,  consisting  of 
eminent  alumni  and  executives  of  major  corporations  of  the  area,  was  very 
effective  in  supporting  the  college  programs  both  within  the  university 
and  in  Sacramento.  There  was  also  the  beginnings  of  the  Engineering 
Alumni  Society,  which  is  currently  of  invaluable  help  to  the  college  in 
fundraising,  working  with  students,  and  general  support  of  the  college. 
Finally  one  can't  emphasize  enough  the  importance  and  hard  work  of  the 
senior  staff,  especially  Frances  Eberhart  (then  Woertendyke) ,  Don  Horning 
and  Vi  Lane.   Clark  Kerr,  in  his  introduction  to  O'Brien's  oral  history 
(8),  makes  this  point  by  the  following  statement:   "A  great  secret  of  the 
administration  of  the  University  of  California  is  that  it  is  not  really 
administered  by  the  deans  or  the  department  chairmen  or  the  chancellors 
or  the  president.   It  is  run  by  an  extremely  good  group  of  assistants 
like  Fran  Eberhart." 

CONCLUSION:   Although  the  decade  of  the  fifties  represented  the  most 
dramatic  building  period  of  the  College  of  Engineering,  important 
progress  continued  under  the  succeeding  deans,  J.  R.  Whinnery,  G.  J. 
Maslach,  Ernest  Kuh,  Karl  Pister,  and  (currently)  David  Hodges.   Recent 
deans  have  been  especially  good  in  developing  sources  of  funds  from 
industry  and  individuals,  with  the  Bechtel  Center,  the  fifth  floor  of 
Cory  Hall  and  the  new  Soda  Hall  all  funded  by  such  gifts.   The 
Engineering  Liaison  Program,  started  by  Dean  Kuh,  has  been  especially 
important  in  this  process.  The  Berkeley  engineering  program  remains  one 
of  the  top  two  or  three  of  the  country  and  is  highly  respected 
internationally. 

ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERING:   Electrical  Engineering  is  chosen  for  a  detailed 
look  at  one  department  because  it  is  the  largest  of  the  engineering 
departments,  and  although  all  of  the  developments  in  the  college  affected 
the  department,  O'Brien  played  less  of  a  direct  role  in  its  growth  than 


223 


in  departments  such  as  mechanical  engineering  and  materials  science.   (As 
explained  earlier,  all  were  divisions  of  a  Department  of  Engineering 
during  O'Brien's  period  as  dean,  but  will  be  referred  to  as  departments 
for  simplicity.) 

Electrical  engineering  was  a  sound  but  little  known  department  in 
the  prewar  and  immediate  postwar  period,  but  was  ranked  third  after  MIT 
and  Stanford  in  the  1966  Carter  Report  and  in  the  1970  Roose  and  Anderson 
report.   (Rankings  were  so  close  in  the  latter  report  that  one  might 
declare  a  tie  for  the  first  four,  MIT,  Stanford,  Berkeley  and  Illinois.) 
The  standing  was  maintained  in  a  National  Academy  of  Sciences  ranking  of 
graduate  programs  in  1982,  with  Berkeley  tied  with  Stanford  as  close 
seconds  to  MIT.   Clearly  there  was  dramatic  improvement  in  the  two 
decades  following  the  war,  and  the  improvement  was  sound  in  that  it  has 
been  maintained  up  to  the  present. 

In  1946,  at  the  end  of  World  War  II,  the  small  faculty  of  eleven  was 
swamped  with  the  large  number  of  returning  GIs,  as  mentioned  for 
engineering  in  general  in  the  introduction.   Many  of  the  appointments 
made  at  that  time  were  temporary  ones  required  for  the  heavy  teaching 
loads,  but  several  important  permanent  appointments  were  made  during 
Thomas  McFarland's  period  as  chair:  0.  J.  M.  Smith,  R.  M.  Saunders,  Sam 
Silver,  D.  J.  Angelakos  and  D.  H.  Sloan.   (The  author's  initial 
appointment  was  as  a  lecturer  while  completing  work  for  his  Ph.D.,  but 
was  made  permanent  in  1948.)   Saunders  was  a  later  department  chair  and 
still  later,  dean  of  engineering  at  UC  Irvine.   Silver  was  a  later 
director  of  the  Electronics  Research  Laboratory  and  still  later  director 
of  the  Space  Sciences  Laboratory.   Sam  played  a  major  role  in  the 
building  of  the  department.  Angelakos  was  a  later  highly  respected 
director  of  ERL. 

The  major  sponsored  research  project  in  existence  at  the  beginning 
of  this  period  was  an  antenna  project  sponsored  by  the  U.S.  Navy's  Bureau 
of  Ships.   (According  to  O'Brien's  oral  history,  he  was  responsible  for 
obtaining  that  grant.)   The  main  focus  of  this  project  was  the  design  and 
testing  of  shipboard  antennas.   Although  a  number  of  the  measurements 
were  routine,  there  was  some  excellent  fundamental  work,  and  several 
doctorates  were  obtained  through  work  on  the  program.   But  around  1950 
the  navy  decided  to  terminate  the  project.   Silver,  who  had  been 
concerned  that  much  of  the  work  didn't  fit  in  a  university  environment, 
was  successful  in  having  the  navy  substitute  a  smaller,  more  fundamental 
program,  sponsored  by  the  Office  of  Naval  Research.  This  remained  one  of 
the  key  programs  of  the  department  for  years,  finally  being  combined  with 
other  projects  into  a  joint  services  program. 

A  second  major  program  was  concerned  with  high-power  microwave  tubes 
suitable  for  radar  or  radar  countermeasures,  set  up  by  L.  R.  Marshall, 
who  had  returned  from  wartime  assignments.   This  was  sponsored  by  the 


224 


Wright  Air  Development  Center  and  featured  Sloan  as  the  primary  faculty 
researcher.  Many  excellent  graduate  students  were  educated  in  this 
laboratory,  but  there  was  a  continuing  problem  in  completing  projects 
useful  for  the  Air  Force.   The  Air  Force  support  was  later  channeled 
through  the  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research  with  a  more 
fundamental  emphasis. 

A  third  important  program  which  was  started  in  1948  was  one  of  the 
pioneering  computer  research  programs  of  the  country,  started  by  Paul 
Morton  with  university  and  Office  of  Naval  Research  support.   This 
project  was  extremely  successful  in  educating  students  who  became  leaders 
in  the  new  but  rapidly  growing  computer  industry  and  was  the  foundation 
on  which  the  outstanding  Berkeley  computer  program  was  eventually  built. 

Although  there  were  some  smaller  sponsored  programs,  most  of  the 
graduate  students  were  related  to  one  of  the  three  described  above.   But 
in  the  early  fifties  a  number  of  problems  arose  because  of  different 
policies  of  the  three  laboratories,  with  some  competition  developing 
among  them.   Silver  was  appointed  to  head  a  committee  to  study  the 
problem  and  this  committee  recommended  formation  of  an  Electronics 
Research  Laboratory  to  coordinate  policies  and  to  help  all  faculty 
members  in  their  search  for  research  support.  The  recommendation  was 
approved,  and  although  Silver  could  have  been  its  first  director,  he 
chose  not  to  accept  but  convinced  the  author  to  return  from  a  leave  at 
the  Hughes  Research  and  Development  Laboratories  to  take  the  position. 
(The  title  used  was  vice  chairman  of  the  division  in  charge  of  the 
Electronics  Research  Laboratory,  with  title  of  director  used  only  for 
later  appointees.)   This  laboratory,  with  a  number  of  dedicated 
directors,  has  been  critical  to  the  development  of  the  department. 

Cory  Hall  was  completed  in  1950,  bringing  the  faculty  together  from 
several  different  locations  and  providing  space  for  expansion.   Paul 
Morton  became  chair  in  1953,  a  year  after  Clark  Kerr  became  chancellor 
and  the  dramatic  buildup  of  the  department  began.  Morton  was  a  very 
well-organized  person  and  gave  attention  to  all  aspects  of  the 
department,  including  curricular  improvements,  facilities,  and  faculty 
recruitment.   Important  faculty  appointments  during  his  chairmanship 
included  V.  H.  Rumsey,  Albert  English,  A.  M.  Hopkin,  Harry  Huskey,  Eli 
Jury,  A.  S.  Hoagland,  Charles  Susskind  and  D.  0.  Pederson.  The  Pederson 
appointment  turned  out  to  be  a  key  appointment  because  of  his  help  in 
recruiting  other  key  persons,  his  administrative  positions  in  the 
department,  and  because  of  his  pioneering  work  in  initiating  integrated 
circuits  work  in  a  university  setting,  and  later  developing  the  most-used 
computer  program  for  electronic  circuit  design  (SPICE). 

Student  enrollments  were  growing  much  more  rapidly  than  the  faculty 
during  Morton's  tenure  as  chair,  so,  dissatisfied  with  the  rate  at  which 
appointments  were  made  available  to  the  department,  Morton  resigned  his 


225 


chairmanship.   He  wrote  an  angry  letter  to  O'Brien  explaining  his 
feelings  concerning  lack  of  support.  Matters  were  tense  for  a  while  but 
O'Brien  presented  the  case  to  Chancellor  Kerr  and  several  new  positions 
were  made  available  to  the  department,  at  which  point  the  author  was 
asked  to  be  chair.   With  the  open  positions,  the  period  1956  to  1959 
continued  as  a  period  of  rapid  growth.   In  department  meetings,  and  in 
discussions  with  an  executive  committee  consisting  of  Morton,  Silver, 
Saunders,  Pederson  and  the  chair,  priorities  were  set  with  goals  to  build 
in  the  areas  of  computers,  solid-state  electronics,  and  the  newly 
developing  field  of  information  theory  to  supplement  the  strength  in 
microwaves  and  electromagnetics  that  had  grown  most  rapidly  after  the 
war.   Pederson  played  a  key  role  in  convincing  former  colleagues  at  Bell 
Laboratories,  Ernest  Kuh  and  Charles  Desoer,  to  join  the  university.   We 
heard  (perhaps  erroneously)  that  Lotfi  Zadeh  was  planning  to  leave 
Columbia  and  were  successful  in  convincing  him  to  come  to  Berkeley.  (He 
has  made  many  contributions  but  is  best  known  for  his  innovative  work  in 
developing  fuzzy  logic.)   Shyh  Wang  and  J.  R.  Singer  came  with  expertise 
in  solid  state.   A.  R.  Bergen,  Aram  Thomasian,  and  Alan  Lichtenberg  were 
appointed  and  T.  E.  Everhart  (now  President  of  Caltech)  and  Alan 
Trivelpiece  (now  director  of  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory)  were 
recruited.   With  these  postwar  appointees  we  had  the  core  of  an 
outstanding  systems  group  (broader  than  the  information  theory  group  we 
had  set  out  to  build).   Pederson  was  leading  the  solid-state  electronics 
group  into  what  would  become  the  pioneering  integrated-circuits  group  of 
the  world.   Wang  and  Singer  were  laying  the  groundwork  for  our  later 
program  in  quantum  and  optical  electronics,  and  Saunders,  Hopkin,  Smith, 
Bergen  and  Bourne  were  modernizing  the  power  program  with  emphasis  on 
broader  aspects  of  energy  conversion  and  control.   Morton  and  Huskey, 
with  some  of  the  outstanding  graduates  of  the  Berkeley  program- -Hoagland, 
Torben  Meisling  and  Douglas  Englebart--were  continuing  to  build  the 
program  in  computers,  but  some  of  the  young  faculty  left  for  industry. 
The  major  development  in  this  area  came  later. 

Important  contributions  were  made  also  by  a  number  of  outstanding 
visitors,  made  possible  through  the  Mackay  endowment.   Some  were  from 
industrial  laboratories  including  the  Bell  Laboratories,  IBM  and  GE. 
Some  were  from  MIT,  Harvard,  Illinois  and  other  top  universities  of  the 
country,  and  some  were  distinguished  international  persons  including 
Dennis  Gabor,  Harold  Barlow  and  Balth  van  der  Pol.   Some  of  these  gave 
full  courses,  others  special  seminars,  and  all  helped  to  shape  the 
research  programs  of  the  department. 

With  Directors  Silver  and  Pederson  the  Electronics  Research 
Laboratory  was  increasingly  effective  during  this  period  in  helping  all 
faculty  obtain  research  support,  and  in  administering  it  when  obtained. 
Uniform  policies  were  applied  to  all  graduate  students  supported  through 
the  laboratory.  Perhaps  the  most  significant  achievement  of  Silver  and 
Pederson  was  the  success  in  having  Berkeley  added  to  the  Joint  Services 


226 


Electronics  Program.  This  program  was  started  during  the  war  with  four 
universities,  and  only  two  others  had  been  added  before  the  Berkeley 
addition.   It  was  at  that  time  a  very  broad  program,  with  most  of  the  EE 
faculty  receiving  some  help  from  it,  and  with  a  considerable  degree  of 
freedom  in  choosing  projects.  There  was  also  increasing  support  from  a 
variety  of  agencies  with  the  ERL  budget  increasing  from  $270,000  in  1953 
to  $1.2  million  ten  years  later. 

Growth  in  both  quantity  and  quality  has  continued  with  a  succession 
of  outstanding  chairpersons:  Saunders,  Zadeh,  Kuh,  Everhart,  David 
Sakrison,  George  Turin,  Donald  Pederson,  Eugene  Wong,  David  Hodges,  Paul 
Gray  and,  currently,  David  Messerschmitt.   Leadership  of  the  Electronics 
Research  Laboratory  continued  strong  with  Angelakos,  Paul  Gray,  W.  G. 
Oldham  and,  currently,  M.  A.  Lieberman  succeeding  Pederson.  Computer 
Science,  after  a  period  as  a  separate  department,  was  returned  as  a 
division  in  the  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering  and  Computer 
Sciences  and  has  become  one  of  the  top  computer  science  programs  of  the 
world.   (The  name  change  to  Electrical  Engineering  and  Computer  Sciences 
actually  occurred  before  the  recombination  and  is  now  common  in  many 
universities  of  the  country.)  By  membership  in  the  academies,  number  of 
major  awards  received  by  the  faculty,  and  number  of  NSF  Presidential 
Awards  received  by  young  faculty,  it  is  clear  that  the  department  is  of 
top  stature.  The  overall  reputation  of  the  university  and  the 
attractiveness  of  the  Bay  Area  helped  greatly  in  the  recruiting,  both  of 
faculty  and  top  students.   During  this  time  good  people  were  available, 
and  support  funds  readily  obtainable  for  sound  projects.   But  the 
contributions  of  many  persons  in  the  department,  and  the  support  of  the 
dean  and  chancellor,  were  the  absolutely  essential  elements  in  the 
successes . 


REFERENCES 


1.  H.  H.  Armsby,  "The  Growth  of  Graduate  Studies  in  Engineering,"  J. 
Engin.  Ed.  45.  220-226,  Nov.  1954. 

2.  Engineering  Manpower  Commission  of  the  American  Association  of 
Engineering  Societies,  "Engineering  and  Technology  Degrees,  1990." 

3.  Clark  Kerr,  "Mike  O'Brien  --  A  Master  Builder  at  Berkeley,"  Shore  and 
Beach.  55,  31-33,  July-Oct.  1987. 

4.  Robert  L.  Wiegel,  "Biographical  Sketch  of  Morrough  P. O'Brien," 
ibid,  pp  6-11. 

5.  John  R.  Whinnery,  "Morrough  P.  O'Brien's  Impact  on  Engineering 
Education,"  ibid,  pp  34-36. 


227 


6.  "Morrough  P.  O'Brien:  Dean  of  the  College  of  Engineering,  Pioneer  in 
Coastal  Engineering,  and  Consultant  to  General  Electric,"  an  oral  history 
conducted  in  1986-1988  by  Marilyn  Ziebarth,  Regional  Oral  History  Office, 
The  Bancroft  Library,  University  of  California  at  Berkeley,  1988. 

7.  Gerold  J.  Giefer,  "California  Water  Resources  Center  Archives,"  Shore 
and  Beach.  52,  27-28,  July  1984. 

8.  Clark  Kerr,  Introduction  to  oral  history,  Ref.6,  pp  x-xi. 

8.  Engineering  Manpower  Commission  of  the  American  Association  of 
Engineering  Societies,  "Engineering  and  Technology  Degrees,  1990." 


Appendix  B 
Selected  Poems  by  John  Whinnery 


The  Colorado  poems,  written  a  decade  or  so 
ago,  are  self-explanatory.    l^y  cousin  tells  me 
that  I  was  misinformed  about  the  drowning  of  tee 
Curicanta  Needle  in  the  Black  Canyon,  so  it  will 
have  to  stand  as  a  symbol  for  all  the  special 
formations  that  were  submerged  in  the  formation 
of  the  great  reservoir.    I  have  also  been  asked 
what  it  means  to  "rush  the  growler"  in  the  Hinsdale 
poem.    (Vy  dad  said  it  was  the  term  they  used  to 
send  out  for  a  bucket  of  beer. 

Ty  rind  Kom  is  a   City"  is  from  the  Schen- 
ectady  era,  circa  1942.   The  White  fountain  poems 
were  composed  while  on  a  1943  backpack  trip  in 
the  Presidential  Range,  shortly  after  meeting  Pat. 
The  22^  year  anniversary  verse  was  inspired  as 
the  coincidence  struck  me,  passing  St.  Patrick's 
Cathedral  in  the  snow,  Parch  17,  1966.   The  idea — 
and  the  title  —  came  immediately  but  it  took 
some  time  to  complete. 

Terry  Story"  is  a  reminiscence  of  the  rare 
but  exciting  trips  to  San  Francisco  during  my 
student  days  at  Cal.    The  po«ms  from  "Ecclesiates" 
to  "Cormorant  Steps"  are  from  the  Orinda  areas 
or  the  North  Coast. 

There  are  of  course  dozens  of  "non-fattening" 
verse  in  the  files  and  two  examples  are  includedt 


229 
READ,  COLORADO 

I 
READ 


The  cynic  says  there  is  no  Read; 

I  have  a  photo 

Showing  clearly  "Read" 

Upon  a  crossroad  sign. 

I  have  a  map 

With  Read  indelibly  imprinted. 

There  once  was  more: 

A  red-brick  school , 

Two  stores, 

A  station 

Where  the  train  from  Crawford 

Stopped  for  mail ; 

A  small ,  white  church 

Where  murderers  (or  liars) 

Told  their  sins  on  cue 

(And  where  I  bid  and  won 

My  first  squash  pie 

With  girl  to  match.) 

The  land  was  poor 

And  gave  its  share  of  grief 

To  those  who  tilled. 

My  father  toiled 

But  seldom  reaped, 

Perhaps  because  of  luck, 

Perhaps  because  leukemic  cells 

Grew  even  then  within  his  veins, 

Perhaps  because 

He  loved  his  gadgets  more. 

Bu  there  was  beauty 

With  the  grief  of  that  small  valley: 

Mesas,  rivers,  canyons; 

Let's  talk  about  the  beauty. 


230 
II 

GUNNISON  RIVER 


Each  spring, 

The  Gunnison  took  part  of  our  small  farm, 

The  mud-bergs  calving 

From  the  steep  adobe  banks 

Into  the  wild  stream. 

A  cottonwood  or  two, 

From  the  grove  which  magpies  claimed 

In  summer, 

Joined  broken  spruce  and  aspen 

In  the  brown  flood. 

When  this  receded, 

We  had  for  recompense 

A  few  yards  of  gravel 

On  the  north  side. 

We  picnicked  there  one  time, 

My  father  musing 

On  how  to  use 

This  legacy  of  rocks. 

The  river  froze  in  winter; 
Skaters  warmed  their  toes, 
Their  wursts,  their  mallows 
By  huge  bonfires. 
My  sisters  skated; 
I  fell  down. 

I  hadn't  known  it  then, 

But  this  small  stretch  of  river 

Was  unique. 

Born  in  high  mountains, 

Reared  in  dark  canyons, 

Destined  for  the  greatest  canyon 

Of  the  world, 

The  Gunnison  had  little  taste  of  farms. 

No  wonder  it  devoured  them, 

Poor  or  no. 


231 
III 


PAONIA 


If  you  want  to  be  mean  to  your  kid, 

Take  him  to  Paonia  at  cherry  time, 

Tell  him  that  he  can  eat  the  cherries, 

Or  (not  and  but  or) 

Ice  cream  for  lunch. 

When  I  was  young, 

They  thought  the  mixture  killed  you. 

A  gloss: 

No  self-respecting  picnic, 

Holiday,  or  family  occasion 

In  western  Colorado 

Was  possible  without  ice  cream  -- 

Hand-cranked,  cream-rich, 

And  topped  with  berries  of  the  season. 

(But  not  cherries.) 

Another  gloss: 

The  cherries  hung  in  brilliant  bunches 

From  the  trees, 

Rich  Bings, 

The  blood-red  ox-hearts, 

Bright  Queen  Annes 

And  tart  pie  cherries  -- 

Tempting  as  Eve's  apple. 

The  mystery: 

I  well  recall  the  agonies  of  choice 

But  can't  remember  how  it  ended. 

I  think  I  fought  the  serpent  for  awhile, 

And  then  succumbed, 

Angry  at  myself 

And  those  with  stronger  wills 

Who'd  have  my  just  dessert. 

By  noon, 

With  crisp-fried  chicken, 

Home-baked  rolls  and  cakes, 

It's  likely  I  recovered. 

And  after  that  I  listened. 

Uncle  puffed  his  mellow  pipe 

And  told,  in  living  color, 

Of  his  bouts  and  near  escapes 

From  every  lynx  or  bobcat 

Wolf  or  mountain  lion, 

That  observed  us  from  the  walls. 


232 

If  you  want  to  be  nice  to  your  kid, 
Take  her  to  Paonia  at  cherry  time, 
Tell  her  that  she  can  eat  the  cherries, 
And  ice  cream  for  lunch 
(Of  course  in  moderation.). 


IV 


THE  BLACK  CANYON 


We  were  having  a  beer  at  Carmichaels, 

Discussing  what  we  most  regretted. 

I  might  not  always  answer  "The  Black  Canyon," 

But  did  that  night. 

I  regret  that  though  I  walked  a  few  miles 

of  its  tracks, 
I  did  not  ever  ride  the  narrow-gauge 

through  the  dark  gorge; 
I  regret  that  the  Curicanta  Needle, 
Symbol  of  my  sister's  school, 
Is  now  drowned. 

We  walked  in  from  Cimarron; 

I  suppose  Dad  was  fishing 

Or  comforting  the  Model -T. 

The  track  into  the  canyon 

Went  a  mile  or  so, 

Then  turned  to  follow  the  wild  river. 

I  recall  the  river's  roar, 

And  slate-dark  walls,  rising 

To  the  thin,  blue  stream  of  sky. 

Years  later, 

You  and  I,  Patricia, 

Stood  upon  the  eastern  ridge, 

Heard  muted  roar, 

Filtered  by  the  canyon  walls, 

Looked  down  the  slate-dark  chasm 

To  the  thin,  brown  stream  below. 

Then  on  to  Sapinero 

Where  the  canyon,  with  its  arms, 

Now  forms  a  monstrous  lake. 


233 


John  Muir 

Decried  the  drowning  of  Hetch  Hetchy: 

'Better  flood  Milan, 

Or  Rheims,  or  Chartres, 

Than  this  unique  cathedral! 

What  say  you,  John,  to  Curicanta? 

Surely  Cleo's  obelisk  could  go. 

(But  giant  trout  swim  'round  it; 
Fisherpersons  tell  me 
'Fishing's  great  below!') 


LIGHT  (AND  CIDER)  FOR  AUSTIN 


For  reasons  most  quixotic 
My  father  bought  a  lightplant 
For  the  tiny  town  of  Austin 
(Two  dozen  houses,  I  suppose.) 
We  moved  up  to  the  mesa, 
A  stone's  throw  from  this  folly. 
My  love  of  things  electric 
Began  those  days  and  grew. 

The  dynamo,  mysterious, 

Was  driven  by  a  Pelton; 

Water  came  by  ditches 

Across  adobe  hills. 

We  walked  the  ditch  by  daylight, 

At  nightime  with  a  lantern, 

To  plug  the  leaky  tunnels 

Small  prairie  dogs  called  home. 

Our  lunch,  sardines  and  crackers, 
While  father  checked  the  belting 
A  lunch  I  thought  delicious; 
I  taste  its  richness  still  * 

In  autumn,  trucks  and  wagons 
From  orchards  on  the  mesa 
Brought  Jonathons  and  winesaps 
And  much  sweet  cider  flowed. 
The  Pelton  drove  the  presses, 
All  hands  filled  up  the  barrels 
While  some  of  us  took  samples; 
I  taste  the  freshness  still. 


234 

Do  orchards  on  the  mesa 

Grow  such  sweet  applas  still? 


VI 


GRAND  MESA 


The  view  to  the  south  wasn't  much: 

A  few  cottonwood 

With  parched  adobe  hills  beyond. 

North  was  something  else: 

That  noble  silhouette, 

A  hundred  lakes, 

The  largest  flat-top  mountain 

Of  the  world. 

Sometime, 

Between  the  first  and  second  haying, 

Dad  felt  the  need  to  fish. 

The  model -T  was  packed  by  midnight, 

Cranked  by  starlight, 

And  --  between  the  first  and  second  Kaiser 

Stalled  by  dawn. 

(Now  isn't  that  a  funny  thing, 

To  name  sweet  streams 

For  World  War's  hated  king?) 

With  water,  skill  and  patience, 

We  finally  chugged  on. 

The  half-way  point  brought  aspen, 

Its  virgin  bark 

Despoiled  by  fool's  initials. 

Farther  on,  dark  spruce. 

The  hardened  sap  of  spruce, 

Chewed  long  enough  makes  gum 

(If  you  have  strength 

And  stomach  for  the  flavor.) 

We  made  our  camp  at  Eggleston  — 

Upper?  Lower?  I  forget. 

And  now  mixed  fragments  of  the  week: 

Much  talk  of  flies: 

Grey  hackle,  royal  coachman; 

Some  talk  of  fish: 

Rainbow,  eastern  brook; 

Woodland  paths  with  columbine, 

Log  rafts  and  cold,  pure  water. 


235 

Wakeup  scents  were  frying  fish, 
Wood  smoke,  campfire  coffee, 
Mingled  with  the  esters 
From  the  pine  and  spruce* 

One  trip,  asleep  and  shoeless, 
I  was  bundled  in  the  car 
And  spent  that  week 
On  moccasins  from  inner  tubes. 

Grand  mesa, 

Flat-top  mountain  of  a  hundred  lakes, 

Its  noble  profile 

Framed  for  Read. 


VII 


LITTLE  HINSDALE 


Sometime, 

Between  the  first  and  second  haying, 

Dad  felt  the  need  to  fish. 

Some  years  we  wandered  south, 

By  Cimarron, 

Through  Sapinero, 

Gunnison,  Lake  City, 

Over  dread  Slumgullion, 

To  Creede  and  Hermit  Lakes 

Where  mother's  folks  farmed  fish 

And  sweet  grass  hay  from  mountain  meadows 

Lake  City  was  her  home  -- 
A  town  of  mines, 
Saloons  and  mines; 
a  church  or  two  —  and  mines; 
A  lightplant  and  some  mines: 
Uncompaghre,  Golden  Fleece, 
Ute  and  Ulay, 
And  other  mines. 

You've  seen  that  picture  of  my  mother, 

I  suppose: 

A  lovely  girl  of  ten  or  so; 

Her  face  serene  but  firm  in  character 

As  she  was,  all  her  life. 


236 

She  called  herself  young  mountain  goat, 

And  claimed,  when  mad, 

She'd  climb  the  hill  behind  Lake  City, 

Brood  upon  the  town, 

Until  her  anger  passed. 

(Angry?  Brooding?  Mad? 

Has  anyone  who  knew  her 

Seen  her  so?) 

I  know  so  little 

Of  that  light  plant  for  Lake  City. 

I  know  two  friends  — 

Her  brother  and  her  future  spouse  -- 

Fine-tuned  the  Pel  tons, 

Swapped  stories  in  the  night, 

Rushed  growler  on  occasion, 

And  listened  for  each  dissonance 

In  music  of  the  dynamos 

And  working  water. 

Her  parents  came  for  mines, 
Lost  gold  and  silver  in  the  mines, 
But  stayed  to  help  make  law 
For  this  young  state 
And  little  Hinsdale. 


237 


VIII   A  CHILD'S  CHRISTMAS  IN  READ 


All  holidays  are  special. 

When  the  alternative 
Was  thinning  sugar  beets 
In  baking  summer, 
Or  milking  cows 
In  cold  wet  snow* 
All  holidays  were  special, 
Some  more  than  others  -- 
Take  Christmast 

The  mesa  known  as  Cedaredge 

Was  dusted  with  light  snow. 

Dad  had  his  twenty-two 

And  four-ten  shotgun, 

Stalking  rabbits 

And  the  perfect  tree. 

The  cedars  there  were  dwarfed 

And  poor  in  symmetry, 

But  had  a  lovely  scent 

And  would  look  great 

With  candles,  paper  chains 

And  popcorn,  strung  on  string. 

(Lighted  candles?   Paper  chains? 

Do  you  recall,  at  church, 

When  Santa  Claus  caught  fire? 

Recovered  though,  I  guessj 

The  presents  came  as  planned.) 

Woman's  work 

(Aside  from  household  chores 
And  milking  cows 

In  cold,  wet  snow) 
Was  centered  on  the  stovet 

Christmas  cookies, 
Necessary  candiesi 

Fudge,  divinity, 
White  fondant  and  penoche, 

Pies  and  cakes 
For  Christmas  dinner. 


238 


Christmas  eve  brought  popcorn, 

Songs  and  restlessness, 

then  banishment  to  sleep. 

(Sleep?   On  Christmas  eve? 

Not  likely.   Bells  sound. 

Heavy  footsteps  in  the  parlor  — 

No  kid  would  stay  abed 

Except  that  Santa  would  then  leave 

With  naught  behind. 

But  morning  came. 

Fruit  and  candy  in  the  socks. 
(How  come  Santa's  candies 

Looked  all  like  mom's?) 
Bright-wrapped  presents 

On  the  tree 
And  that  one  special  gift 

Unwrapped  below. 

The  scene  now  blurs. 

There's  play  with  Christmas  gifts, 

Games  with  relatives. 

These  and  the  feast 

fade  this  a  wondrous  day. 

(Almost  as  wondrous 

As  in  anticipation.) 


239 


MY  VIKD  NOW  IS  A  CITY 

Vy  mind  now  is  a  city,  without  plan, 

Chaotic  as  the  drabbest  web  of  steel 

That  hides  the  light  from  yoor  undreaming  man, 

And  throbs  with  groaning  rail  and  ^ound.ng  wheel. 

The  thousand  architectures  of  my  brain 

Lie  all  confused,  mad  mixtures  of  design; 

The  small  green  parks  that  wait  for  sun  and  rain, 

The  hopeful  spires  of  churches  that  are  mine, 

Are  shadowed  by  the  towers  of  steel  ana  stone, 

My  hard  technology,  or  lie  too  near 

The  cheap  ana  tangled  tenements  I  own 

With  shame.   It  is  too  late  to  pray,  I  fe^r, 

The  little  quiet  thoughts  again  to  find 

At  graze  in  smooth  green  pastures  of  the  mind. 


240 


NOTES  FROM  THE  WHITE  MOUNTAINS  TO  ONE  AT  HOME 


IN  A  FEW  WORDS 


Not  alone  because  you  are  to  me  all  color 

Have  I  found  you  this  day 

In  each  flame  maple,  golden  birch, 

Or  rich  composite  mountain-side  of  color 

In  these  fair  New  England  hills. 

Not  alone  because  you  are  to  me  all  poetry 

Have  I  tried  to  tell  in  a  few  words 

The  quiet  beauty  of  your  love. 


241 


II 


LESSON  IN  MAPLE  LEAVES 


They  came,  three  and  a  dog, 

Across  the  fall-plowed  fields, 

The  stolen  maple  flame  piled  high  in  their  arms. 

The  boy,  behind  now,  ran  a  moment  to  catch  up, 

Stumbl ing, 

For  he  looked  downward  at  the  branches  he  carried. 

The  look  on  his  face,  I  think,  was  a  puzzled  one; 

I  had  felt  the  same, 

Wondering  why  in  no  single  leaf  and  no  single  branch, 

Though  carefully  selected, 

Is  there  the  beauty  or  fair  share  of  all  the  beauty 

In  the  total  tree. 

We'd  passed, 

And  I'll  not  know  what  arch  between  great  rooms, 

What  space  above  the  fire, 

What  food  piled  table, 

These  would  help  make  gay, 

So  gay,  perhaps,  the  boy  would  half  forget  his  Question. 

The  lesson,  though,  if  learned, 

Is  one  taught  pleasantly  by  maple  leaves: 

The  whole  is  sum  of  all  its  parts, 

A  rule  of  cold  geometry, 

Has  little  application  to  its  complex  sisters, 

Life,  the  hard  one, 

Or  the  soft  one,  beauty. 


242 


III 


CHOCORUA 


All  day  we  had  watched  the  sunset  colors  of  fall  leaves, 

And  though  I  love  the  sunsets, 

I  was  thinking  these  more  fair, 

As  if  this  were  the  sunset  of  a  year 

And  so  required  a  richer  beauty 

Than  the  sunset  of  a  single  day. 

Now,  at  the  lake  backed  by  the  horn-topped  mountain, 

The  setting  sun, 

Amused,  not  angry  at  my  fickleness, 

Breathed  colors  second  to  no  others 

Through  the  long  frail  clouds. 

And  in  the  lake  these  pictures: 

Tinted  strata,  tall  tree-banks  of  color, 

Image  of  the  mountain, 

Soft  on  the  lake  as  on  the  tongue  the  name, 

Chocorua,  Chocorua, 

The  lake  and  mountain. 

Having  once  seen  these  together, 

You  may  not  again  think  of  the  two  apart. 


243 
IV 

SCENE  WITH  MOON-SHADOWS 


In  the  wood  there  were  moon-shadows. 

On  the  lake, 

The  smallest  of  lakes, 

The  water  was  so  roughened  by  the  wind 

That  it  bore  no  single  image  of  the  moon, 

Only  a  spattered  pathway  of  light, 

A  thousand  dancing  mirrors; 

And  this  spread  and  thinned, 

Or  raced  its  edge  across  the  lake 

With  each  new  gust  of  wind. 

The  arc  of  sky, 

Still  darkly  blue  above  the  great  ravine; 

Now  lighted  leisurely  some  stars, 

Not  all  familiar 

For  we'd  lived  too  long  in  cities. 

Near  the  lake, 

A  shadow's  length  above  the  water, 

Flame  points  crackled, 

Smoke  threads  rose  in  ordered  patterns, 

Changed,  then  lashed  out  fiercely 

At  the  eddy-ends  of  wind. 

Those  who  sat,  or  crouched, 

Or  moved  about  behind  the  shelter  of  the  rock, 

Cut  birch  in  lengths  to  suit  the  flames, 

Or  talked, 

Or  watched  these  silent  pictures: 

Smoke  and  fire-fly  sparks, 

Stars  and  blown  reflections, 

Moon  above  the  Bootspur, 

And  the  woods  with  shadows. 


243 


IT.    y    a    Vinqt-deux   Ans 


Twenty-two    years    ago   today, 

Ue    in    New    York, 

Our  six-month  anniversary! 

You  in  green  for  Patrick, 

With  your  blue  eyes 

And  your  Irish-fresh  complexion 

Set  off  by  the  flowers  you  lovedi 

Camellias . 

(Camellias?   Weeds  in  California, 

But  how  special 

In  the  east 

In  winter, 

Pinned  with  love. ) 

I  know  I  watched  you 

Wore  than  squirrels  in  Central  Park, 
More  than  all  the  long  parade. 

II  y  a  vingt-deux  ans. 
I  in  New  York, 

This  time  alone* 

Snow  falls  along  the  Avenue; 

The  great  cathedral's  spires 

Are  white. 

It  was  Just  here 

I  bought  you  that  small  pin, 

And  there  you  squeezed  my  hand, 

And  on  that  corner 

That  we  stood  to  watch  the  scene. 

There's  no  parade  this  year  — 

They  say  because  of  snows 

But  I.m  the  one  that  knows 

The  reason's  you're  not  here. 


FERRY  STORY 
244 

In  those  days, 

We  took  the  K-train  from  College, 

Down  Alcatraz  to  the  Bay. 

The  festive  Sunday  crowd 

Watched  ferries 

Warp  into  their  slips; 

Names  upon  the  land: 

Klamath,  Shasta, 

Mendocino. 

"You  can't  imagine  the  excitement 

Of  coming  to  The  City 

By  the  ferries  of  the  Bay." 

And  what  did  we  do  in  The  City? 

What  does  each  provincial? 

The  zoo,  the  wharf 

(Prawn  to  eat  like  peanuts 

As  we  watched  the  North  Beach  fleet.) 

Playland-at-the-Beach, 

The  great  map  in  the  Ferry  Building, 

Where  are  they  now? 

(Where  are  they  now?) 

For  twenty  cents 

We  rode  the  Sunday  trolleys, 

Buses,  cable  cars 

From  Here  to  There, 

From  To  to  Fro. 

At  evening,  Lucca's; 

Dark  Sicilian  grotto, 

Lighted  by  the  candles 

In  their  wax-encrusted  bottles: 

Scents  of  bay  and  garlic, 

Tarragon,  oregano; 

Tastes  of  strong-spiced  pasta, 

Antipasta,  crusted  breads 

And  soup  in  huge  tureens. 

The  entrees,  veal  and  fowl  and  ham 

Etcetera; 

(You  could  have  all 

At  that  one  price: 

Three-quarters  of  the  dollar  — 

It  was  Depression.) 

Wine  and  huge  desserts. 

(A  few  of  that  strong  class 

Survives. ) 

The  ferries  home 

Passed  lighted  towers 

That  would,  one  day, 

Be  bridges; 

The  ferries  would  be  restaurants 

Or  mud-encrusted  skeletons 

Beneath  the  Bay. 


245 


•ECCLESIASTES  11:7 
(Come  7:11) 


"Truly  the  light  is  sweet 

And  a  pleasant  thing  it  is 

For  the  eyes  to  behold  the  sun." 

This  lovely  valley  lies  at  our  feet, 

Slowly  unfolding 

As  the  night  is  done. 

Light  filtered  through  oak  leaves 

Is  soft  to  the  touch; 

That  falling  on  Roundtop 

Has  a  quality  such 

We  remember  it  all  through  the  day. 

The  clouds  near  Diablo 

Have  started  to  burn; 

By  watching  them  closely 

We  silently  learn 

How  the  light  brings  new  color  to  gray. 

In  this  light,  in  this  color, 

Is  truth  understood 

That  by  night  was  enveloped  in  dun. 

Truly  the  "wisdom  is  good  ... 

And  by  it  there  is  profit 

To  them  that  see  the  sun." 


246 


AKEBONO 


"Loveliest  of  trees." 

I  shall  miss  most  the  trees 

Ul  hei  climates  change 

Or  when  wild  atoms 

Blast  our  landscape 

To  a  moonscape 

Or  a  Texas  plain. 

But  for  the  present 

Look  out  from  your  window 

To  our  trees. 

You  first  sight  redwoods, 

Tall,  symmetrical  and  dark  — 

A  frame  to  all  we  see. 

(Is  this  our  finest  tree?) 

Then  notice  the  madrone 

With  shy,  light  flowers 

Among  two  shades  of  green 

(As  lovely  as  we've  seen.) 

Or  oak  with  small  crisp  leaves, 

Growing,  falling,  through  the  year. 

(Live  oak  were  always  here.). 

The  native  buckeye  has  its  day, 

Burnt  in  August,  bright  in  flay, 

And  pine  and  plum  and  apricot, 

Each  perfect  in  its  way. 

But  for  this  week  in  April, 

As  with  Housman  I  must  go, 

To  watch  each  petal  of  the  cherry 

As  it  slowly  melts  its  snow. 


247 
TYPHA  LATIFOLIA 


Cattails! 

That's  a  funny  name. 

"Sausages -on-stick," 

I'd  say. 

We  had  enough  when  I  was  young  — 

The  marsh  along  the  railroad 

Had  cattails  to  our  eyeballs! 

Blackbirds  in  them  sang: 

"0-ka-lee;  karak-la-ray." 

En  route  to  school 

We  pulled  a  few; 

(Knights  of  the  brandished 

Sausage  --  yeh! ) 

We  liked  them  best  when  ripe  -- 

Not  dandelion  ripfc, 

But  whacks  along  the  tracks 

Made  sure  they  flew. 

Cattails! 

Our  little  lake  in  Lafayette 

Has  some. 

(But  where  are  all  the  redwing 

Blackbirds,  singing 

"0-ka-lee;  karak-la-ray"? 

And  where  are  all  the  children 

Sending  winged  seeds  on  their  way?) 


248 


WHALE-UIATCH  AT  SALT  POINT 


Not  all  geysers  are  faithful  -- 

These  geysers-of-the-sea  least  of  all. 

We  see  five  in  a  minutBt 

Then  none  for  awhile. 

This  sign  explainsi 

The  giant  beasts  blow  several  times 

Along  the  surface, 

Get  their  bellies  full  of  air 

And  then  dive  deep. 

And  what  shall  we  do 

While  the  whales  browse  the  depths? 

There  is  really  nothing  to  look  at 

But  the  wind-blown  waves 

Pounding  the  rocks* 

The  foaming  rivulets 

Working  back  to  the  sea, 

The  spume  blown  southward, 

And  gliding  sea  birds 

Between  the  spray 

And  quiet  sky. 


249 


CORMORANT  STEPS 


See  that  rock? 

Not  the  far  one  -- 

The  tall  one  nearer  shore: 

Notice  how  the  North  side's 

Cut  in  steps. 

I  cannot  tell  if  they  were  carved, 

Or  worn, 

Or  cast  with  molding  of  the  rock; 

I  do  not  think  the  present  users  made  them. 

In  some  seasons 

There's  a  cormorant  on  every  step, 

Watching  mother  sea. 

The  cormorant's  an  awkward  bird 

At  times, 

But  not  in  flight 

And  not  these  sentinels  on  steps. 


250 


THE  PEPPER  WHEN  HE  PLEASES 


251 


Expressing  Distress 

Upon  Learning  that  the  Scallop, 

Botticelli's  Symbol  for  Aphrodite, 
Is  often  a  Hermaphrodite! 


Some  mollusks  have  gender 
And  others  do  not. 
(Or  to  be  more  precise, 
They  have  quite  a  lot, 
With  a  he-cell 
And  she-cell 

Right  there  in  one  sea  shell, 
So  each  single  is  really  a  pair.) 
Thus  we  make  this  deduction: 
When  it  comes  to  seduction, 
It's  a  purely  internal  affair. 


Curriculum  Vitae 

JOHN  R.  WHINNERY 

University  Professor  Emeritus 
Electrical  Engineering  and  Computer  Sciences 


Appendix  C 


Specialization 
Field 

Experience 


Profegeiemal 
Services 


Communications  applications  of  lasers  with  emphasis  on  short- 
pulse  phenomena. 

John  R.  Hhinnery  was  born  1n  Read,  Colorado,  on  July  26,  1916. 
He  received  the  B.S.  degree  1n  Electrical  Engineering  from  the 
University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1n  1937,  and  the  Ph.D. 
from  the  same  Institution  1n  1948.  From  1937  to  1946  he  was 
with  the  General  Electric  Company,  Schenectady,  New  York, 
working  on  problems  1n  waveguide  discontinuities,  microwave 
tubes,  and  applications  to  radar.  During  that  period  he  was 
active  in  war  training  classes,  and  In  1945-46  held  a  part- 
time  lectureship  at  Union  College,  Schenectady.  Dr.  Hhinnery 
has  been  on  the  faculty  of  the  University  of  California, 
Berkeley,  since  1946,  holding  appointments  as  Lecturer, 
Associate  Professor,  and  Professor.  In  1980  he  was  appointed 
University  Professor  at  the  University  of  California.  From 
1952  to  1956  he  directed  the  Electronics  Research  Laboratory; 
from  1956  to  1959  he  was  Chairman  of  the  Electrical  Engineering 
Department;  from  1959  to  1963  he  was  Dean  of  the  College  of 
Engineering  at  Berkeley.  On  leaves  from  the  University,  he 
acted  as  head  of  the  Microwave  Tube  Research  Section  of  the 
Hughes  Aircraft  Company  1n  1951-52,  and  engaged  In  research 
in  quantum  electronics  at  the  Bell  Laboratories,  Inc.,  Murray 
Hill,  New  Jersey,  1n  1963-64.  He  has  held  Visiting  Professor 
ship  at  the  University  of  California,  Santa  Cruz  and  at  the 
Stanford  University.  In  1959  he  held  a  John  Simon  Guggenheim 
Fellowship  at  ETH,  Zurich,  Switzerland;  In  1973-74  he  held  a 
Research  Professorship  In  the  Miller  Institute  of  Basic  Research 
in  Science  at  LJC  Berkeley;  In  1986  he  had  an  appointment  at 
California  Institute  of  Technology  on  a  Sherman  Falrfleld 
Distinguished  Scholarship;  and  in  May  1986  he  was  Invited 
as  Honorary  Professor  of  Chengdu  Institute  of  Radio  Engineer- 
Ing,  People's  Republic  of  China. 

John  R.Wh inner/  lias  been  on  numerous  government  advisory 
committees,  principal  of  which  were  the  Advisory  Group  on 
Electron  Devices  DoD,  the  Science  and  Technology  Advisory 
Committee  to  NASA  for  the  Apollo  program,  the  Standing 
Committee  on  Controlled  Thermonuclear  Research  of  the  former 
Atomic  Energy  Commission,  and  several  advisory  commutes  for 
the  National  Science  Foundation.  He  was  on  the  Telecommunications 
Committee  of  NAE-NRC  and  Committee  on  Science  and  Public  Policy 
(COSPUP)  of  NAS.  He  has  been  on  visiting  qr  advisory  committees 
to  the  engineering  schools  of  California  Institute  of  Technology, 
Harvard  University,  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology, 
Stanford  University,  Worcester  Polytechnic  Institute,  Yale  Univer 
sity  as  well  as  the  other  University  of  California  campuses. 


Awards  and 
Honors 


253 


IEEE  Fellow  (1952) 

John  Simon  Guggenheim  Fellowship  (1959) 

National  Academy  of  Engineering  Member  (1965) 

IEEE  Education  Medal  (1967) 

National  Academy  of  Sciences  Member  (1972) 

ASEE  Lamme  Medal  (1974) 

Named  as  Outstanding  Educator  of  America  (1974) 

IEEE  MTTS  Microwave  Career  Award  (1976) 

Optical  Society  of  America  Fellow  (1978) 

University  Professor  (1980) 

American  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences  Fellow  (1980) 

UC  Berkeley  Engineering  Alumni  Society's  Distinguished 

Alumni  Award  (1980) 
IEEE  Life  Member  (1982) 

Member,  Modesto  (California)  High  School  Hall  of  Fame  (1983) 
IEEE  MTTS  Centennial  Medal  Award  (1984) 
IEEE  Medal  of  Honor  (1985) 
University  Anniversary  Commorative  Medal  of  Chile's 

Catholic  University  (1986) 
NAE  Founders  Award  (1986) 
The  Berkeley  Citation  (1987) 
American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Sciences  Life  Member 

(1988) 

The  Berkeley  Fellows,  UC  Berkeley  (1989) 
IEEE  MTT-S  Distinguished  Lecturer  for  the  U.S.  (1990) 


Publications 

Society 
Memberships 


See  attached  listing. 


Amen  can  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Sciences 

American  Physical  Society 

IEEE 

Optical  Society  of  America 

Sigma  Xi 

American  Society  of  Engineering  Education 


254 
PUBLICATION  LIST 


1.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Summary  of  Wave  Types  and  Propagation  Characteristics 
for  Simple  Wave  Guides,"  General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  26648,  November 
3,  1941. 

2.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Skin  Effect  Formulas,"  Electronics,  February  1942. 

3.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Radial  Transmission  Lines,"  General  Electric  Report, 
D.  F.  26659,  April  25,  1948. 

4.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Transmit  Time  Quantities  Applicable  to  Grid-Separation 
Circuits,"  Part  I,  General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46210,  July  28,  1942. 

5.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Transmit  Time  Quantities  Applicable  to  Grid-Separation 
Circuits,"  Part  II,  General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46218,  October  22, 
1942. 

6.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Penetration  of  Pulse  Fields  into  Conductors,"  General 
Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46217,  October  20,  1942. 

7.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Study  of  Magnetron  Equivalent  Circuit  by  Network 
Analyzer,"  General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  4S246,  April  5,  1943. 

8.  H.  W.  Jamieson,  T.  ,E.  Robbins  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Equivalent  Circuits 
for  Capacitive  Tvpe  Discontinuities  in  Rectangular  Wave  Guides,"  General 
Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46252,  July  5,  1943. 

9.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Wave  Guides  of  Foreshortened  Cross  Section,"  General 
Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46253,  July  8,  1943. 

10.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Preliminary  Report  on  Re-entrant  Oscillator  Theory," 
General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46256,  August  2,  1943. 

11.  C.  Concordia,  W.  Ridgeway,  G.  Kron  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Network  Analyzer 
Studies  of  Electromagnetic  Cavity  Resonators,"  General  Electric  Report, 
D.  F.  63060,  August  31,  1943. 

12.  T.  E.  Robbins  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Cut-off  for  Circumferential  Modes  in 
Coaxial  Lines,"  General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  56260,  September  24,  1943, 

13.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Graphical  Construction  for  Studying  Impedience  Trans 
forming  by  Quadrupoles,"  General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46285,  February 
3,  1944.  ' 

14.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Cut-off  in  Guides  Partially  Filled  with  Dielectric," 
General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46288,  April  12,  1944. 

15.  T.  E.  Robbins,  "Equivalent  Half -Wavelength  and  Quarter-Wavelength  in 
Radial  Lines,"  General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46289,  April  13,  1944. 

16.  T.  E.  Robbins  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Equivalent  T  and  Pi  Networks  for 
Radial  Lines,"  General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46290,  April  17,  1944. 


255 

17.  0.  R.  Whinnery,  "Basis  for  General  Study  of  Microwave  Triode  Oscillators," 
General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46291,  April  22,  1944. 

18.  T.  E.  Robbins  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Radial  Line  Discontinuities,"  General 
Electric  Report,  D.  F.  46293,  June  22,  1944. 

19.  0.  R.  Whinnery,  "Resonant  Line  Shortened  by  Re-entrant  Sections,"  General 
Electric  Report,  D.  F.  78003,  November  20,  1944. 

20.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Power  Loss  in  Linear  Four  Poles,"  General  Electric  Report, 
D.  F.  78004,  November  21,  1944. 

21.  H.  W.  Jamieson  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Equivalent  Circuits  for  Discontinuities 
in  Transmission  Lines,"  Proc.  IRE,  Vol  32,  pp  98-114,  February  1944. 

22.  S.  Ramo  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "A  New  Approach  to  the  Solution  of  High- 
Frequency  Field  Problems,"  Proc.  IRE,  Vol  32,  pp  284-288,  May  1944. 

23.  C.  Concordia,  W.  Ridgeway,  G.  Kron  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Network  Analyzer 
Studies  of  Electromagnetic  Cavity  Resonators,"  Proc.  IRE,  Vol  32,  pp  360- 
367,  June  1944. 

and  J.  R.  Whinnery 

24.  H.  W.  Jamieson,  T.  E.  Robbins, /"Coaxial  Line  Discontinuities,"  Proc.  IRE, 
Vol  32,  pp  695-709,  November  1944. 

25.  S.  Ramo  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Fields  and  Waves  in  Modern  Radio."  John  Wiley 
&  Sons,  N.  Y.  Vii,  502  pages,  1944. 

26.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Equations  Useful  in  the  Study  of  Microwave  Networks  by 
Equivalent  Ideal  Transformers,"  General  Electric  Report,  D.  F.  78007, 
January  2,  1945. 

27.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Some  Thermal  Radiation  Problems  with  Thin  Wires,"  General 
Electric  Report,  D.  F.  78009,  February  6,  1945. 

28.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  Review  of  "Tables  of  Associate  Legendre  Polynomials," 
Mathematical  Tables  Project  by  Columbia  University  Press,  Proc.  IRE, 
Vol  34,  p  280,  May  1945. 

29.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  Review  of  "Electromagnetic  Engineering."  by  Ronald  W.  P. 
King,  McGraw-Hill,  Waves  and  Electrons,  Vol  1,  No.  104,  February  1946. 

30.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  Review  of  "Tables  of  Arosin  X:  by  Mathematical  Tables, 
Project."  by  Columbia  University  Press,  1945,  Waves  and  Electrons,  Vol  1, 
No.  160,  1946. 

31.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Coupling  Between  Parallel  Wire  Grids,"  General  Electric 
Report,  D.  F.  78020,  March  1946. 

32.  H.  W.  Jamieson  and  J.  R.  Hhinnery,  "Power  Amplifiers  with  Disk-Seal  Tubes," 
Proc.  IRE,  Vol  34,  July  1946. 

33.  A.  M.  Gurewitsch  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Microwave  Oscillators  Using  Disk- 
Seal  Tubes,"  Proc.  IRE,  Vol  35,  No.  5,  May  1947. 


256 

34.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  Review  of  "Klystron  Tubes,"  Proc.  IRE,  Vol  35,  November  1947. 

35.  H.  W.  Jamieson  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Study  of  Transit-Time  Effects  in  Disk 
Seal  Power  Amplifier  Triodes,"  Proc.  IRE,  Vol  36,  No.  1,  January  1948. 

36.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "The  Effect  of  Input  Configuration  Antenna  Impedance," 
Journ.  of  Appl.  Phys.,  Vol  21,  October  1950. 

37.  T.  T.  Taylor  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Applications  of  Potential  Theory  to  the 
Design  of  Linear  Arrays,"  Journ.  of  Applied  Physics,  Vol  22,  No.  1, 
19-29,  January  1951. 

38.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Design  of  Microwave  Filters,"  presented  at  Symposium  on 
Modern  Network  Sunthesis,  sponsored  by  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Brooklyn, 
N.  Y.  April  1952. 

39.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Some  Notes  on  Oscillators  Using  Wave-Type  Tubes,"  Hughes 
Technical  Report  No.  279,  February  1952. 

40.  S.  Ramo  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Fields  and  Waves  in  Modern  Radio,"  John  Wiley 
&  Sons,  2nd  edition,  1953. 

41.  H.  R.  Johnston  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Traveling  Wave  Tube  Oscillators,"  Trans, 
of  IRE,  PGED-2,  January  1953. 

42.  C.  K.  Birdsall  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Waves  in  an  Electron  Stream  with  General 
Admittance  Walls,"  Journ.  of  Applied  Physics,  Vol  24,  No.  3,  pp  314-323, 
March  1953. 

43.  H.  R.  Johnston  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Traveling  Wave  Oscillator  Tunes 
Electronically,"  Electronics,  Vol  26,  No.  8,  August  1953. 

44.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Noise  Phenomena  in  the  Region  of  the  Potential  Minimum," 
Trans,  of  IRE  Elec.  Dev.,  Vol  ED-1 ,  No.  4,  December  1954. 

45.  D.  C.  Stinson  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Radial  Line  Discontinuities,"  Proc.  IRE, 
Vol  43,  No.  1,  January  1955. 

46.  V.  C.  A.  Ferraro  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Electromagnetic  Theory,"  Proc.  IRE, 
Vol  43,  No.  4,  April  1955. 

47.  W.  H.  Watson  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Study  of  a  Plane  Short  on  a  Shielded 
Helix,"  Trans,  of  IRE  Elec.  Dev.,  Vol  ED-2,  No.  4,  October  1955. 

48.  M.  R.  Currie  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "The  Cascade  Backward-Wave  Amplifier:  A 
High-Gain  Voltage-Tuned  Filter  for  Microwaves, "  Proc.  of  IRE,  Vol  43,  No. 
11,  November  1955. 

49.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  Review  of  "Principle  of  Electromagnetism."  by  E.  B. 
Moultin,  Proc.  of  IRE,  Vol  44,  No.  3,  March  1956. 

50.  W.  H.  Watson,  H.  R.  Jory  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Cascade  Backward-wave 
Amplifiers,"  L'Onde  Electrlque,  NumeYo  Special  du  Congres  Tubes  Hyper- 
frgquences,  Paris,  Vol  36,  pp  951-  961,  November  1956. 


257 

51.  S.  Silver,  D.  J.  Angel akos  and  0.  R.  Whinnery,  "Dynamic  Field  Equations," 
American  Institute  of  Physics  Handbook,  Sections  5b-8  to  5b-15,  McGraw- 
Hill,  1957. 

52.  J.  R.  Singer,  C.  Susskind  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Basic  Research  in  Microwave 
Electronics,"  IER  Series  60,  Issue  215,  October  1958. 

53.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "History  and  Problems  of  Microwave  Tube  Noise,"  invited 
lecture  given  at  Institute  for  Advanced  Electrical  Engineering  of  the 
Swiss  Federal  Institute  of  Technology  of  Zurich,  May  4,  1959. 

54.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  Remarks  on  "The  Dynamics  of  Electron  Beams,  Sections 
4-1  to  4-7.  R.  W.  Gould  ed. 

55.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "High-Frequency  Effects  on  the  Potential  Minimum  on  Noise," 
IRE  Trans,  on  Elec.  Dev.,  Vol  ED-7,  No.  4,  pp  218-230,  October  1960. 

56.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Traveling  Wave  Tube,"  McGraw-Hill  Encyclopedia  of  Science 
and  Technology,  1960. 

57.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Backward  Wave  Tube,"  McGraw-Hill  Encyclopedia  of  Science 
and  Technology,  1960. 

58.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Magnetron,"  McGraw-Hill  Encyclopedia  of  Science  and 
Technology,  1960. 

59.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Klystron,"  McGraw-Hill  Encyclopedia  of  Science  and 
Technology,  1960. 

60.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Microwave  Tube,"  McGraw-Hill  Encyclopedia  of  Science 
and  Technology,  1960. 

61.  T.  Van  Duzer  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Noise  Problems  in  Cross-Field  Devices," 
presented  at  3rd  International  Conference  on  Microwave  Tube,  Munich, 

May  1960. 

62.  T.  Van  Duzer  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "High-Frequency  Behavior  of  the  Crossed- 
Field  Potential  Minimum,"  IRE  Trans.  Elec.  Devices,  Vol  ED-8,  No.  4, 

pp  331-341,  July  1961. 

63.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Perturbation  of  Cavity  Resonator,"  Encyclopedia 
Dictionary  of  Physics,  Pergamon  Press,  1961. 

64.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  ed.,  "State  of  the  Art  Report  on  Wide-Range  Voltage  Tuned 
Oscillators,"  Classified  Signal  Corps  Report,  1961. 

65.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  ed.,  "State  of  the  Art  Report  on  High-Power  Microwave 
Tubes  for  Radar,"  Classified  Signal  Corps  Report,  1961. 

66.  T.  Van  Duzer  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Noise  in  Crossed-Field  Electron  Beams," 
Academic  Press,  Chapter  4.8,  1961. 

t 

67.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Noise  Transport  in  the  Crossed-Field  Diode,"  IEEE  Elec. 
Dev.,  November  1963. 


258 

68.  D.  0.  Pederson,  J.  J.  Studer  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Introduction  to 
Electronic  Systems,  Circuits  and  Devices."  McGraw-Hill ,  1964. 

69.  M.  A.  Pollack  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Noise  Transport  in  the  Crossed-Field 
Diode,"  IEEE  Iran,  on  Elec.  Dev.,  Vol  ED-11,  pp  81-89,  March  1964. 

70.  R.  C.  Leite,  R.  S.  Moore  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Low  Absorption  Measurements 
by  Means  of  the  Thermal  Lens  Effect  Using,  AN  He-Ne  Laser."  Appl .  Phys. 
Lett.  Vol  5,  No.  7,  pp  141-143.  October  1964. 

71.  J.  P.  Gordon,  R.  C.  C.  Leite,  R.  S.  Moore,  P.  S.  Porto  and  J.  R.  Whinnery, 
"Long-Transient  Effects  in  Lasers  with  Inserted  Liquid  Samples,"  Journ. 
Appl.  Physics,  Vol  36,  No.  1,  pp  3-8,  January  1965. 

72.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  ed.,  "The  World  of  Engineering,"  McGraw-Hill,  1965. 

73.  P.  K.  Tien,  J.  P.  Gordon  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Focusing  of  a  Light  Beam  of 
Gaussian  Field  Distribution  in  Continuous  and  Periodic  Lens-Like  Media," 
Proc.  IEEE,  Vol  53,  No.  2,  pp  129-136,  February  1965. 

74.  S.  Ramo,  J.  R.  Whinnery  and  T.  Van  Duzer,  "Fields  and  Waves  in  Communication 
Electronics,"  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  1965. 

75.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Advances  in  Microwave  Devices,"  URSI  Review  of  U.S.  Work  in 
Commission  VII,  General  Assembly. 

76.  R.  W.  Gould,  A.  E.  Siegman  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Progress  in  Radio  Electronics," 
H.  Heffner,  ed.,  Radio  Science,  Vol  12,  No.  12,  pp  1379-1388,  December  1966. 

77.  J.  Kerdiles  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Acoustic  Gas  Lenses  for  Light,"  IEEE 
Trans.  MTT,  Vol  15,  No.  5,  pp  321-322,  May  1967. 

78.  D.  Auston,  G.  Hong  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Mode-switching  of  a  Multi-Mode  Laser 
for  Infornation  Coding,"  presented  at  IEEE  Conference  of  Electronic  Device 
Research,  Montreal,  June  1967. 

79.  D.  T.  Miller,  F.  Dabby  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Laser  Measurement  of  Low 
Optical  Absorption  Coefficients,"  presented  at  IEEE  Conference  of 
Electronic  Device  Research,  Montreal,  June  1967. 

80.  D.  T.  Miller,  F.  Dabby  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Thermal  Convection  and 
Spherical  Aberration  Distortion  of  Laser  Beams  in  Low-Loss  Liquids," 
IEEE  Journ.  Quan.  Elec.,  Vol  QE-3,  pp  382-383,  September  1967. 

81.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Thermal  Effects  in  Liquids,"  presented  at  Institute  for 
Defense  Analysis  High-Power  Laser  Propagation  meeting,  January  1968. 

82.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Thermal  Lens  Effect  in  Laser  Beams,"  IEEE  Student 
Journal,  Vol  6.  No.  2,  pp  7-10,  March  1968. 

83.  J.  W.  Chu,  C.  V.  Shank,  F.  Dabby  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Short-transient 
Effects  in  Lasers  with  Inserted  Liquid  Samples,'1  IEEE  Journ.  Quan.  Elec., 
Vol  QE-4,  p  42,  May  1968. 

84.  F.  W.  Dabby  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Thermal  Self -Focus ing  of  Laser  Beams 
in  Lead  Glasses,"  Appl.  Phys.  Ltrs.,  Vol  13,  pp  284-286,  October  1968. 


259 

85.  G.  W.  Hong  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Switching  of  Phase-Locked  States  in  the 
Intra-cavity  Phase-Modulated  He-Ne  Laser,"  IEEE  Journ.  Quan.  Elec.,  Vol 
QE-5,  pp  516-520,  July  1969. 

86.  F.  W.  Dabby,  R.  W.  Boyko,  C.  Shank  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Short  Time-Constant 
Self-Defocusing  of  Laser  Beams,"  IEEE  Journ.  of  Quan.  Elec.,  Vol  QE-5, 

No.  10,  pp  516-520,  October  1969. 

87.  F.  W.  Dabby,  T.  K.  Gustafson,  Y.  Kohanzadeh  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Thermally 
Self-Induced  Phase  Modulation  of  Laser  Beams,"  Appl .  Phys.  Ltrs.,  Vol  16, 
pp  362-365,  May  1970. 

88.  W.  Streifer  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Analysis  of  a  Dye  Laser  Tuned  by  Acousto- 
optic  Filter,"  Appl.  Phys.  Ltrs.,  Vol  17,  No  8,  pp  335-337,  October  1970. 

89.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Educational  Technology  Assessment  -  National  Academy  of 
Engineering,"  presented  at  the  Conference  on  Computers  in  Instruction, 
Rand  Reports  718,  NSF  July  1971. 

90.  K.  S.  Chang,  P.  Burlamacchi,  C.  Hu  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Light  Amplification 
in  a  Thin  Film,"  Appl.  Phys.  Ltrs.,  Vol  20,  No.  8,  pp  313-314,  January 
1972. 

91.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  assistant  editor,  "Optical  Communications,"  report  of 
National  Science  Foundation  Grantee-User  Meeting  on  Optical  Communication 
Systems,  University  of  Maryland,  January  1972. 

92.  C.  Hu  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "New  Thermooptical  Measurement  Method  and  a 
Comparison  with  Other  Methods,"  Applied  Optics,  Vol  12,  pp  72-79, 
January  1973. 

93.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Thermal  and  Acoustic  Interactions  of  Light  Beams  in 
Various  Materials, "presented  at  NSF  Grantee-User  meeting  on  DCS,  Rice 
University,  September  1972,  published  in  Proceedings. 

94.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Optical  Communication  Devices  -  Recent  Results  using 
Liquid  Crystals,"  presented  at  NSF  Grantee-User  meeting  on  OCS,  UC 
Berkeley,  May  1973,  published  in  Proceedings. 

95.  C.  Hu,  N.  Amer  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Liquid  Crystals  in  Integrated  Optics," 
presented  at  Conference  on  Laser  Engineering  and  Applications,  June  1973 
and  published  IEEE  Journ.  Quan.  Elec.,  Vol  QE-9,  pp  684-685,  June  1973. 

96.  Y.  Kohanzadeh,  K.  W.  Ma  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Measurement  of  Refractive 
Index  Change  with  Temperature  Using  Thermal  Self-Phase  Modulation," 
Applied  Optics,  Vol  12,  pp  1584-1587,  July  1973. 

97.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Electromagnetic  Waves,"  20th  Century  Encyclopedia, 
Institute  della  Enciclopedia  Italiana,  December  1973. 

98.  C.  Hu,  N.  Amer  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Optical  Deflection  in  Thin-Film 
Nematic-Liquid-Crystal  Waveguides,"  IEEE  Journ.  6f  Quan.  Elec.,  Vol 
QE-10,  No.  2,  February  1974. 


260 

99.  C.  Haug  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Experiments  on  Transverse  Mode  Locking  of 
Circular  Cylindrical  Optical  Beams  and  Certain  Flat  Beams,"  IEEE  Journ. 
of  Quan.  Elec.,  Vol  QE-10,  No.  4,  April  1974. 

100.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Laser  Measurement  of  Optical  Absorption  in  Liquids," 
Accounts  of  Chemical  Reseqrch,  Vol  7,  pp  225-231,  June  1974. 

101.  C.  Hu  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Field-Realigned  Hematic  Liquid  Crystal 
Optical  Waveguides,"  IEEE  Journ.  Quan.  Elec.,  Vol  QE-10,  No.  17, 
July  1974. 

102.  C.  Hu  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Losses  of  a  Nematic  Liquid-Crystal  Optical 
Waveguide,"  Journ.  of  Opt.  Soc.  of  America,  Vol  64,  No.  11,  November 
1974. 

103.  Y.  Kohanzadeh,  M.  M.  Carroll  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Thermoelastic  Waves 
Generated  by  Laser  Beams  of  Low  Power,"  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am.,  Vol  57, 
No.  1 ,  January  1975. 

104.  R.  V.  Pole,  E.  M.  Conwell ,  H.  Kogelnik,  P.  K.  Tien,  A.  Yariv,  A.  J.  DeMaria 
and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Integrated  Optics:  A  Report  on  the  2nd  OSA  Topical 
Meeting,",  Appl .  Opt.,  Vol  14,  No.  3,  pp  569-579,  1975. 

105.  S.  Sheem  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Guiding  by  Sinale  Curved  Boundaries  in 
Integrated  Optics,"  Wave  Electronics,  Vol  l,~No.  1,  pp  61-68,  1974/1975. 

106.  S.  Sheem  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Modes  of  a  Curved  Surface  Waveguide  for 
Integrated  Optics,"  Wave  Electronics,  Vol  1,  No.  2,  pp  105-116,  1974/1975. 

107.  0.  Teschke,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Theory  and  Operation  of  High- 
Power  CW  and  Long-Pulse  Dye  Lasers,"  IEEE  Journ.  of  Quan.  Elec.  Vol  QE-12, 
No.  7,  pp  383-395,  July  1976. 

108.  0.  Teschke,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Thermal  Effects  in  Jet-Stream 
Dye  Lasers,"  IEEE  Journ.  of  Quan.  Elec.  Vol  QE-12,  No.  8,  pp  513-515, 
August  1976. 

109.  Z.  A.  Yasa,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Subpi cosecond  Pulses  from  a 
CW  Double  Mode-Locked  Dye  Laser,"  Appl.  Phys.  Ltrs.,  Vol.  30,  No.  1, 
pp  24-26,  January  1977. 

110.  C.  Hu,  Y.  S.  Kwon  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Liquid  Crystal  Waveguides  for 
Integrated  Optics,"  IEEE  Journ.  of  Quan.  Elec.,  Vol  13,  No.  4,  April  1977. 

111.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Status  of  Integrated  Optics  and  Some  Unsolved  Problems," 
Radio  Science,  Vol  12,  No.  4,  pp  491-498,  August  1977. 

112.  S.  Y.  Wang,  M.  Heiblum,  T.  K.  Gustafson  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Ultra  Broad 
band  Integrated  Non-Linear  Device,"  presented  at  the  International 
Conference  on  Integrated  Optics  and  Optical.  Fiber  Communication  held 

in  Tokyo,  Japan,  July  1977  and  published  in  Technical  Digest,  Paper  A3:3. 

113.  M.  Heiblum,  S.  Y.  Wang,  T.  K.  Gustafson  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Characteristics 
of  Integrated  MOM  Junctions  at  DC  and  at  Optical  Frequencies,"  IEEE  Journ. 
of  Quan.  Elec.,  Vol  QE-14,  No.  3,  March  1978. 


261 

114.  E.  Bourkoff,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Parametric  Study  of  Double 
Mode-Locking  of  the  CW  Dye  Laser,"  Picosecond  Phenomena,  C.  V.  Shank, 
E.  P.  Ippen,  S.  L.  Shapiro,  editors,  Springer-Verlag,  pp  99-102,  May 
1978. 

115.  E.  Bourkoff,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Measurements  of  Picosecond 
Pulse  Shapes  for  the  Highly  Synchronous  CW  Double  Mode-Locked  Dye  Laser," 
Appl.  Phys.  Ltrs.,  Vol  34,  No  7,  pp  455-457,  April  1979. 

116.  E.  Bourkoff,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Independent  Tunability  of 
the  Double-Mode-Locked  CW  Dye  Laser,"  Optics  Ltrs.,  Vol  4,  page  179, 
June  1979. 

117.  M.  P.  Guedes,  T.  K.  Gustafson,  K.  Heiblum,  D.  P.  Siu,  C.  W.  Slayman, 

Y.  Yasuoka  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Photoinduced  Currents  in  Metal -Barrier- 
Metal  Junctions,"  Radiation  Energy  Conversion  in  Space,  Kenneth  W. 
Billman,  ed.,  Vol  61  of  of  Progress  in  Astonautics  and  Aeronautics. 

118.  J.  A.  Buck,  K.  K.  Li  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Optoelectronic  Switching  in  a 
Stub  Transmission  Line,"  Journ.  Appl.  Phys.,  Vol  51,  No.  1,  pp  769-771, 
January  1980. 

119.  V.  V.  Cherny,  G.  A.  Juravlev  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "A  Multilayer  Fiber 
Guide  with  Rectangular  Core,",  IEEE  Trans.  MTT,  Vol  28,  No.  4,  April  1980. 

120.  J.  A.  Buck,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Effects  of  Separated  Absorption 
and  Emission  Spectra  on  Degenerate  Four-Wave  Mixing  in  Organic  Dyes," 
Journ.  of  Opt.  Soc.  of  Amer.,  Vol  71,  No.  11,  November  1981. 

121.  K.  K.  Li,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Optoelectronic  Pulse-Forming 
Networks  with  Novel  Input  and  Output  Junctions,"  presented  at  Sixth 
Topical  meeting  on  Integrated  and  Guided-Wave  Optics,  Asilomar,  California, 
January  1982. 

122.  K.  K.  Li,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Optical  Switches  for  Generation 
and  Pulse  Shaping  of  Ultra-Short  Electrical  Pulses,"  presented  at  Society 
of  Photo-Optical  Instrumentation  Engineers  (SPIE)  meeting,  Los  Angeles, 
California  January  1932. 

123.  G.  Arjavalingam,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Highly  Synchronous  Mode- 
Locked  Picosecond  Pulses  at  Two  Wavelengths,"  Optics  Ltrs.,  Vol  7,  No.  5, 
pp  193-195,  May  1982. 

124.  "G.  Arjavalingam,  A.  Dienes,  K.  K.  Li  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Double  Mode 
Locking  of  Dye  Lasers;  Optoelectronic  Switches  Using  Short  Optical  Pulses," 
presented  at  National  Science  Foundation  Grantee-User  meeting  on  Optical 
Communication  Systems,  UC  Berkeley,  California  June  1982.  Published  in 
Proceedings. 

125.  K.  K.  Li,  G.  Arjavalingam,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Single  and 
Double  Mode  Locked  Ring  Dye  Lasers  Theory  and  Experiment,"  presented 

at  Third  Topical  meeting  on  Picosecond  Phenomena,  Garmisch-Partenkirchen 
FRG,  Germany,  June  1982.  IEEE  JQE,  Vol  QE-19,  pp  539-544,  April  1983. 


262 

126.  K.  K.  Li,  A.  Dienes  and  0.  R.  Whinnery,  "Stability  and  Astigmatic 
Compensation  Analysis  of  Five-Mirror  Cavity  for  Mode-Locked  Dye 
Lasers,"  Applied  Optics,  Vol  20,  p  407,  February  1981 . 

127.  J.  A.  Buck,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Tunable  Phase  Conjugate 
Signal  Generation  Through  Two-Frequency  Four-Wave  Mixing  1n  an  Organic 
Dye,"  presented  at  the  12th  International  Quantum  Electronics  Conference, 
Munich,  Germany,  June  1982. 

128.  K.  K.  Li,  G.  Arjavalingam,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Propagation 

of  Picosecond  Pulses  on  Microwave  Striplines,"  IEEE  Trans,  on  MTT,  Vol  30, 
18,  August  1982. 

129.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  K.  K;  Li  and  A.  Dienes,  "Picosecond  Signal  Transmission 

in  Microstrip  Transmission  Lines,"  presented  at  the  workshop  on  Picosecond 
Photoconductors  and  Applications,  Los  Alamos,  New  Mexico,  August  1982. 

130.  H.  J.  Fink  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Slow  Waves  Guided  by  Parallel  Plane 
Tape  Guides,"  IEEE  Trans,  on  MTT,  Vol  30,  #11,  November  1982. 

131.  A.  Dienes,  G.  Arjavalingam,  J.  H.  Chang,  G.  Hasnain  and  J.  R.  Whinnery, 
"Dispersion  of  Picosecond  Pulses  in  Striplines  and  in  Fibers,"  presented 
at  NSF  Grantee-User  Meeting  on  Optical  Communications,  MIT,  Cambridge, 
Mass.,  June  1983. 

132.  G.  Hasnain,  G.  Arjavalingam,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Dispersion 

of  Picosecond  Pulses  on  Microstrip  Transmission  Lines,"  SPIE  Proceedings, 
Fall  1983. 

133.  G.  Hasnain,  G.  Arjavalingam,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Distortion  and 
Pulse  Shaping  of  Short  Electrical  Pulses  from  Dispersion  of  Microstrip 
Lines,"  Nuclear  Science  Symposium,  San  Francisco,  California,  October  1983. 

134.  J.  A.  Buck,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Cross  Coupled  Phase  Conjugation 
through  Two- Frequency-Four  Wave  Mixing  in  Dyes,"  IEEE  JQE,  Vol  QE-19, 
#11,  November  1983. 

135.  K.  K.  Li,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Pulse  Forming  with  Opto-electronic 
Switches,"  Picosecond  Optoelectronic  Devices,  C.  H.  Lee,  ed.,  Academic 
Press,  1984. 

136.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  A.  Dienes,  H.  Ansari,  J.  H.  Chang  and  G.  Hasnain,  "Recent 
Results  on  Generation  and  Switching  of  Short  Optical  Pulses,"  presented 
at  NSF  Workshop  on  Optical  Communications,  UC  San  Diego,  June  1984. 

137.  Y.  Twu,  A.  Dienes,  S.  Wang  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "High  Power  Coupled  Ridge 
Waveguide  Semiconductor  Laser  Arrays,"  Appl-.-Phys. -Lett..  Vol- 45,  *?, 

pp  709-711,  October  1,  1984. 

138.  S.  Ramo,  J.  R.  Whinnery  and  T.  Van  Duzer.  "Fields  and  Waves  In  Communication 
Electronics."  2nd  ed.,  817  pages,  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  August  1984. 

f 

139.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  Book  Review  for  AAAS  Science,  "Masers  and  Lasers"  by  M. 
Bertolotti,  Vol  225,  August  31,  1984. 


263 

140.  Y.  J.  Twu,  A.  Dienes,  S.  Wang  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "High  Power  Coupled 
Ridge  Waveguide  Semiconductor  Laser  Arrays",  Appl .  Phys.  Lett.,  Vol. 
45(7),  pp  709-711,  October  1,  1984. 

141.  H.  Ansari,  A.  Dienes,  J.  R.  Whinnery  and  G.  Arjavalingam,  "Subpicosecond 
Pulse  Development  in  a  Xenon-ion-laser  pumped  Colliding-pulse  Mode  Locking 
Dye  Laser,"  Optical  Society  of  America  Annual  Meeting,  San  Diego,  November 
1984,  Abstract  in  JOSA  A,  Vol  1;  1278  November  1984. 

142.  J.  H.  Chang,  A.  Dienes,  S.  Wang  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Nonlinear  Coupling 
Between  Monolithic  Guides  for  Optical  Pulse  Compression",  Optical  Society 
of  America  Annual  Meeting,  San  Diego,  November  1984,  Abstract  in  JOSA  A, 
Vol  1,  p  1278,  November  1984. 

143.  H.  Ansari,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Subpicosecond-pulse  Development 

in  a  Colliding-pulse  Mode-locking  Dye  Laser  Pumped  by  a  Pulsed  Xenon  Laser", 
Optics  Letters,  Vol  10(1),  pp  19-21,  January  1985. 

144.  Y.  J.  Twu,  K.  Chen,  A.  Dienes,  S.  Wang  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "High  Performance 
Index-guided  Phase-locked  Semiconductor  Laser  Arrays",  IEEE  Electronics 
Letters,  Vol  21,  No  8,  pp  324-325,  11  April  1985. 

145.  Y.  J.  Twu,  K.  L.  Chen,  S.  Wang,  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Eigenmode  Analysis  of 
Phase-locked  Semiconductor  Laser  Arrays",  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.,  Vol.  48(1), 
January  6,  1986. 

146.  Y.  J.  Twu,  K.  Chen,  S.  Wang,  J.  R.  Whinnery  and  A.  Dienes,  "Mode  Character 
istics  of  Phased-locked  Semiconductor  Lasers  Arrays  at  and  above  Threshold", 
AT&T  Bell  Labs  Technical  Memo  dated  April  1986. 

147.  G.  Hasnain,  C.  C.  Hasnain  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Use  of  Doping  Superlattices 
for  Tunable  Emitters  and  Modulators",  Proceedings  of  NSF  Workshop  on 
Optical  Nonlinearities,  Fast  Phenomena  and  Signal  Processing,  Optical 
Sciences  Center,  University  of  Arizona,  pp  303=308,  May  22-23,  1986. 

148.  G.  Hasnain,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Dispersion  of  Picosecond  Pulses 
in  Coplanar  Transmission  Lines",  IEEE  Trans,  on  MTT,  Vol  MTT-34,  No.  6, 

pp  738-741,  June  1986. 

149.  G.  Hasnain,  G.  H.  Dohler,  J.  R.  Whinnery,  J.  N.  Miller  and  A.  Dienes, 
"First  Observation  of  Efficient  and  Highly  Tunable  Room  Temperature 
Electroluminescence  from  Gallium  Arsenide  Doping  Superlattices",  XIV 
International  QE  Conference  1986  at  Moscone  Center,  San  Francisco, 
June  9-13,  1986. 

150.  G.  Hasnain,  C.  J.  Chang-Hasnain,  G.  H.  Dohler,  J.  N.  Miller,  N.  M.  Johnson, 
J.  R.  Whinnery  and  A.  Dienes,  "Tunable  absorption  and  electroluminescence 
in  GaAs  doping  superlattice",  presented  at  the  2nd  International  Conference 
on  Superlattices,  Microstructures  and  Microdevices,  Goteborg,  Sweden, 
August  1986. 

151.  C.  Chang-Hasnain,  D.  F.  Welch,  D.  R.  Scifres,  J.  R.  Whinnery,  A.  Dienes 
and  R.  D.  Burnham,  "Diffraction-limited  emission  from  a  diode  laser  array 
in  an  apertured  graded-index  lens  external  cavity",  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  49, 
pp  614-616,  September  15,  1986. 


264 

151.  G.  Hasnain,  G.  H.  Dohler,  J.  R.  Whinnery,  J.  N.  Miller  and  A.  Dienes, 
"Highly  tunable  and  efficient  room- temperature  electroluminescence 

from  GaAs  doping  superlattices" ,  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  49(20),  pp  1357-1359, 
November  17,  1986. 

152.  C.  J.  Chang-Hasnain,  G.  Hasnain,  N.  M.  Johnson,  G.  H.  Dohler,  J.  N.  Miller, 
J.  R.  Whinnery  and  A.  Dienes,  "Tunable  electroabsorption  in  gallium 
arsenide  doping  superlattices",  presented  at  SPIE's  Advances  in  Semiconductor 
and  Semiconductor  Structures,  March  22-27,  1987  in  Bay  Point,  Florida, 
published  in  SPIE  Proceedings,  Vol.  797. 

153.  M.  Ogura,  M.  C.  Wu,  W.  Hsin  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Surface  emitting  laser 
diode  with  bent  waveguide",  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  Vol.  50(2),  pp  705-707, 
March  23,  1987. 

154.  M.  Ogura,  M.  C.  Wu,  W.  Hsin,  J.  R.  Whinnery  and  S.  Wang,  "Surface  emitting 
laser  diode  with  bent  waveguide",  presented  at  CLEO/IQEC  1987  Conference, 
Baltimore,  Maryland,  April  1987. 

155.  C.  J.  Chang-Hasnain,  J.  R.  Whinnery,  A.  Dienes,  J.  Berger,  D.  R.  Scifres, 
and  W.  Streifer,  "Narrow  single  lobed  emission  with  high  power  and  high 
efficiency  from  an  external  cavity  coupled  laser  array",  Conference  on 
Lasers  and  Electro-Optics,  Baltimore,  Maryland,  Paper  Thill ,  April  1987. 

156.  C.  J.  Chang-Hasnain,  G.  Hasnain,  N.  M.  Johnson,  G.  H.  Dohler,  J.  N.  Miller, 
J.  R.  Whinnery  and  A.  Dienes,  "Tunable  electroabsorption  in  gallium 
arsenide  doping  superlattices",  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  Vol.  50(4),  pp  915-917, 
April  1987. 

157.  C.  J.  Chang-Hasnain,  J.  Berger,  D.  R.  Scifres,  W.  Streifer,  J.  R.  Whinnery 
and  A.  Dienes,  "High  power  with  high  efficiency  in  a  narrow  single-lobed 
beam  from  a  diode  laser  array  in  an  external  cavity",  Appl.  Phys.  Lett. 
Vol.  50,  pp  1466-1467,  May  1987. 

158.  Y.  Twu,  S.  Wang,  J.  R.  Whinnery  and  A.  Dienes,  "Mode  characteristics  of 
phase-locked  semiconductor  laser  arrays  at  and  above  threshold",  IEEE 
Journ.  Quant.  Elec.,  Vol.  QE-23,  pp  788-795,  June  1987. 

159.  M.  Ogura,  W.  Hsin,  M.  C.  Wu,  S.  Wang  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  S.  C.  Wang  and 
J.  J.  Yang,  "Surface-emitting  laser  diode  with  vertical  GaAs/GaAlAs 
quarter-wavelength  multilayers  and  lateral  buried  heterostructure", 
Appl.  Phys.  Lett.,  Vol.  51(21),  pp  1655-1657,  23  November  1987. 

160.  w.  Hsin,  M.  Ogura,  J.  P.  Weber,  S.  C.  Wang,  J.  J.  Yang,  M.  C.  Wu,  S.  Wang 
and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "GaAs/AlGaAs  surface  emitting  laser  diode  with  vertical 
distributed  feedback  optical  cavity  and  transverse  junction  buried  hetero 
structure",  presented  at  International  Electron  Devices  Meeting,  Washington, 
D.C.,  IEDM  87  Technical  Digest,  pp  792-795,  December  1987. 


265 

162.  C.  J.  Chang-Hasnain,  G.  Hasnain,  G.  H.  Dohler,  N.  M.  Johnson,  J.  N.  Miller, 
J.  R.  Whinnery  and  A.  Dienes,  "Tunable  electroabsorption  and  electrolumine 
scence  in  GaAs  doping  superlattices",  SPIE  Proceedings,  Vol  792,  pp  45-49, 
1987. 

163.  C.  J.  Hasnain,  J.  R.  Whinnery,  A.  Dienes,  W.  Streifer  and  D.  R.  Scifres, 
"Theoretical  analysis  of  the  off-center  aperture  mirror  external  cavity  laser 
array",  Conference  on  Lasers  and  Electro-optics  (CLEO),  Anaheim,  CA,  April  27, 
1988. 

164.  G.  Hasnain,  J.  R.  Whinnery,  A.  Dienes  and  D.  Mars,  "Wavelength  bistable 
electroluminescence  from  GaAs  doping  superlattices",  Conference  on  Lasers 
and  Electro-optics  (CLEO),  Anaheim,  CA,  April  28,  1988. 

165.  G.  Hasnain,  C.  Chang-Hasnain,  A.  Dienes  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "Characteristics 
of  a  monolithically  integrated  doping  superlattice  optical  circuit",  Appl . 
Phys.  Lett.,  Vol  52,  pp  1765-1767,  23  May  1988. 

166.  S.  P.  Dijaili,  J.  S.  Smith,  J.  R.  Whinnery  and  A.  Dienes,  "A  novel  method 
of  analyzing  optical  pulse  propagation:  dispersion  matrices  and  its  appli 
cation  to  ultra-high-speed  time  division  multiplexed  systems",  IEEE  Lasers 
and  Electro-optics  Society  1988  LEOS  Annual  Meeting,  November  2-4,  1988, 
Santa  Clara  Convention  Center,  Santa  Clara,  CA. 

167.  C.  J.  Chang-Hasnain,  A.  Dienes,  J.  R.  Whinnery,  W.  Streifer  and  D.  R.  Scifres, 
"Characteristics  of  the  off-centered  apertured  mirror  external  cavity  laser 
array",  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  54(6),  6  February  1989,  pp  484-486. 

168.  "Low  Threshold  Distributed  Bragg  Reflector  Surface  Emitting  Laser  Diode  With 
Semiconductor  Air-Bridge-Supported  Top  Mirror",  W.  Hsin,  G.  Du,  J.  K.  Gamelin, 
K.  J.  Malloy,  S.  Wang  and  J.  R.  Whinnery,  Electronic  Letters,  1st  March  1990, 
Vol.  26,  No.  5. 

169.  J.  R.  Whinnery,  "The  Teaching  of  Electromagnetics",  IEEE  Transactions  on 
Education,  Vol  33,  No.  1,  pp  3-7,  February  1990. 


266 


INDEX--John  R.  Whinnery 


Abbott,  Wilton,  25 

Accreditaion  Board  for  Engineering 

and  Technology  (ABET),  92,  139 
Agency  for  International 

Development  (AID),  127 
Allende,  Salvador,  128 
Allied  Corporation  (now  Allied 

Signal),  208 

Angelakos,  D.J.,  223,  226 
antennae  research,  54-55,  59-62, 

74,  153,  223.  See  also  radar 

research. 
Apollo  program.  See  National 

Aeronautics  and  Space 

Administration. 

Army  Research  Office,  75,  77,  188 
Atkinson,  Richard  C.,  197 
Atomic  Energy  Commission,  100, 

Standing  Committee  on  Controlled 

Thermonuclear  Research,  199 
Auston,  Dave,  183,  190-191 
Axtell,  Dayton,  76,  79 

Bainer,  Roy,  122-125,  131 

Baker,  W.R.G.,  46,  48 

Barlow,  Harold,  225 

Barrett,  Barbara,  18-19,  23 

Beaver,  Bill,  55 

Becker,  George,  176-177 

Bedford,  B.D.,  37-38,  42 

Beggs,  Jim,  47 

Bell  Telephone  Laboratories,  25, 

32,  34,  61,  68,  82,  87,  88,  89- 

90,  156,  160,  164,  176,  181, 

182,  184,  185,  190,  191,  199, 

206,  225 
Bent,  Amanda  Jane  Carr 

(grandmother),  4-5 
Bent,  Charles  Hammond 

(grandfather),  3-5 
Bent,  Ralph  (cousin),  4 
Bergen,  Art,  129,  225 
Birdsall,  Charles  K.  (Ned),  62-63, 

68 
Black,  Leonard,  28,  53,  54-55,  131 


Blewett,  John,  39 

Boelter,  L.M.K.,  119,  130,  144 

Bolljahn,  Jack,  54 

Bondley,  Ralph,  47 

Bourne,  Henry  C.,  Jr.,  155,  225 

Brauman,  John,  208 

Brayton,  Bob,  90 

Brewer,  George,  62,  63 

Brewster,  Kingman,  204-205 

Bridges,  William,  179 

Erode,  Robert  B.,  29 

Brooklyn  Polytechnic  Institute, 

220 

Brooks,  Harvey,  220 
Brown,  Gordon,  104,  220 
Brown,  Wayne,  129 
Buchsbaum,  Sol,  199 
Burchard,  John,  140,  218 
Burdick,  Eugene,  218 
Bush,  Vannevar,  75 
Business  of  Science,  The,  67 

Caltech  (California  Institute  of 
Technology),  61,  89,  92,  128, 
155,  164,  181,  199,  203-204, 
215,  225 

California  State  legislature,  112, 
220,  222 

Calvin,  Melvin,  198 

Cambridge  University,  208 

Campbell,  Bonham,  132 

Case  Western  Reserve  University, 
129 

Chile,  Catholic  University  of, 
127-129 

Clark,  William  M. ,  183 

Clauser,  Francis,  164,  167 

cold  war,  56,  65,  195 

College  of  Engineering,  UC 

Berkeley,  22-33,  72-74,  78-82, 
84-86,  92-96,  163-163,  210, 
212,  215-226,  curriculum,  93- 
94,  96,  216-219,  224,  dean  of, 
97-159,  faculty  hiring,  70,  72- 
73,  84-85,  86-91,  95-97,  216, 


267 


College  of  Engineering,  UC  (cont.) 
221,  223,  224,  225,  fundraising 
for,  147-148,  158,  159,  222; 
Department  of  Civil  Engineering, 
95,  102,  105,  109,  113-114,  138- 
139,  215,  218,  220,  221; 
Department  of  Electrical 
Engineering,  52-59,  69-99,  107, 
117,  120,  135-139,  152-154,  218, 
220-221,  223-226,  chair  of,  84- 
99,  156,  225,  Electronics 
Research  Laboratory,  66,  74-80, 
86,  156,  159,  223,  224,  225-226, 
research  in,  54-55,  59-60,  63, 
82-83,  176-187,  190-193, 
teaching  in,  57-60,  156,  179- 
182,  184-187,  192-193; 
Department  of  Materials  Science, 
102,  108-110,  218,  223; 
Department  of  Mechanical 
Engineering,  104-106,  109,  137- 
139,  218,  220-221,  223, 
Aeronautical  Sciences  Division, 
104-106,  149;  Department  of 
Naval  Architecture,  104,  108- 
110,  113-114,  219;  Department  of 
Nuclear  Engineering,  104,  109, 
117,  219,  221;  Engineering 
Alumni  Society,  146-147,  222; 
engineering  science  program, 
142-144,  219;   Industrial 
Liaison  Program,  159,  188,  222; 
Institute  of  Engineering 
Research,  78-79,  134-135,  219, 
222;  Institute  of  Transportation 
and  Traffic  Engineering,  102, 
115,  116-117,  130,  219-220; 
Operations  Research  Center,  115- 
117;  Sanitary  Engineering 
Research  Laboratory,  115,  116- 
117,  127-128,  219-220.  See  also 
Engineering  Advisory  Council. 

Collier,  Randolph,  220 

Colorado,  growing  up  in,  1-13,  16- 
17 

Columbia  University,  87,  183,  225 

Commission  on  Engineering 
Education,  157-158 


community  colleges,  relations 
with,  132-133,  217-218 

computers,  49,  157-158,  171-172; 
research  in,  70-71,  74,  86, 
153-154,  224,  225;  software, 
171-172,  188.  See  also  under 
University  of  California, 
Berkeley. 

Conant,  James  Bryant,  140 

Conrad,  Albert  G.,  123-125 

Constance,  Lincoln,  103 

Cornell  University,  89,  155,  203, 
206,  208 

Cory,  Clarence  L.,  114 

Cruse,  Dick,  177 

Currie,  M.R.,  177,  179 

Cutler,  C.  Chapin,  89-90 

Dalziel,  Charles,  52,  53 
Dantzig,  George  B.,  115-116 
David,  Ed,  157 
Davis,  Manner,  95,  101-102,  115, 

116-117,  220 
Davis,  Raymond  E.,  114 
Degnan,  Ron,  160 
Dehn,  Rudy,  47 
DeMonte,  Louis,  112,  113 
depression,  1930s,   22,  23-24,  26, 

32-34 

Derleth,  Charles,  31 
Desoer,  Charles,  87,  94,  225 
Deves,  Raul,  127-128 
Dienes,  Andrew,  185,  191,  192 
discrimination,  in  housing,  117- 

118 

Dohler,  Gottfried,  191-192 
Doolittle,  Jimmy,  145 
Doppler  principle,  38 
Dorn,  John  E.,  96,  216 
Doslaugh,  Vernon,  19,  21-22 
Dresselhaus,  Mildred,  208 

Eberhart,  Frances  Woertendyke, 

111,  129,  131,  147,  222 
Eberhart,  Howard,  165 
Edwards,  Sir  Sam,  208 
Eitel-McCullough,  176 


268 


electrical  engineering.  See 
College  of  Engineering, 
Department  of  Electrical 
Engineering;  electromagnetics; 
engineering  curriculum; 
microwave  research;  opto 
electronics. 

electromagnetics,  39-42,  44-45, 
54,  73,  86,  153,  173-176,  225. 
See  also  microwave  research. 

electron  microscopes,  39 

electronics,  34,  46,  48,  53-54, 
156,  166,  181,  194-195,  225 

Electronics  Research  Laboratory. 
See  under  College  of 
Engineering. 

Elias,  Peter,  89 

Elliott,  Stanley,  25,  28,  32 

Engelbart,  Douglas  C.,  71,  225 

Engineering  Advisory  Council,  130, 
144-146,  220,  222 

engineering  curriculum, 

undergraduate,  26-31,  90-94,  96, 
103-106,  108-110,  122,  125-126, 
131-144,  149,  151-152,  156-158, 
164-167,  201,  203-205,  217-219; 
graduate  55-57,  122,  184-187, 
201.  See  also  College  of 
Engineering. 

engineering  industry,  159,  208- 
209;  and  academia,  63-64,  65-68, 
72,  76,  79,  81-82,  87,  88,  219, 
222,  224,  225.  See  also  Bell 
Telephone  Laboratories;  General 
Electric  Company;  Hughes 
Aircraft;  Wright  Air  Development 
Center. 

engineering  research,  159,  173- 
194,  197-198,  199,  215,  220, 
222,  223,  224,  225;  federal 
government  support  for,  70-71, 
74-78,  82-83,  165,  187-189,  215, 
222,  223,  224.  See  also  Bell 
Telephone  Laboratories;  College 
of  Engineering;  General  Electric 
Company,  Hughes  Aircraft;  laser 
research;  Wright  Air  Development 
Center. 


English,  Albert,  224 
Eta  Kappa  Nu,  25,  28,  32-33,  41 
Etcheverry,  Bernard  A.,  114 
Everhart,  Tom,  89,  143,  155,  177, 
225,  226 

farm  life,  2,  8,  10-13,  16,  21,  26 

Feher,  George,  55,  181 

Fenn,  Will,  25 

Ferguson,  Larry,  50 

Feuer,  Lewis,  140,  218 

Fick,  Clifford,  42 

Fields  and  Waves  in  Modern  Radio, 

39-42,  54,  64,  73 
Finch,  Dan,  53 
Fink,  Lyman,  26,  33 
Ford  Foundation,  127-129 
Fretter,  William,  171 
fundraising  for  universities,  147- 

148,  158,  159,  205.  See  also 

College  of  Engineering,  UC 

Berkeley. 

Gabor,  Dennis,  89,  225 

Garland,  Clyne  F. ,  105,  123,  131, 
222 

General  Electric  Company  (GE),  32- 
51,  61,  62,  68,  82,  197,  211, 
220,  225;   advanced  engineering 
program,  36-43,  55;  Electronics 
Laboratory,  41,  43-45,  48; 
research,  38-39,  43-47,  48,  59, 
173,  176;  test  program,  35-36, 
54 

Georgia  Institute  of  Technology, 
25,  32,  155 

Giallorenzo,  Tom,  202 

Gier,  Joseph  T.,  119 

Gill,  Arthur,  129 

Ginzton,  Ed,  32-33 

Goedt,  Warren,  123 

Gold,  Tommy,  206 

Goldberg,  Arthur  (student),  161 

Goldsworthy,  Elmer  G. ,  29 

Goodman,  Dan,  55 

Gordon,  Jim,  183 

Gotaas,  Harold,  220 

Gould,  Roy,  199 


269 


Gould,  Samuel  B.,  123 

government  grants,  for  scientific 
research,  70-71,  74-78,  82-83, 
165,  187-189,  215,  223;  for 
special  programs,  148,  158 

graduate  students,  as  research 
assistants,  79-81,  91,  223,  224; 
teaching  of,  72,  91,  122,  179- 
182,  184-187,  191-193.  See  also 
engineering  curriculum. 

Granger  Associates  (now  Digital 
Switch  Corporation) ,  208 

Gray,  Paul,  226 

Graybeal,  Troy,  53 

Gurewitsch,  Anatole,  47 

Gustafson,  Ken,  177,  184,  185 

Haanstra,  John,  71 

Haeff,  Andrew,  62-64 

Hahn,  W.C.,  38-39,  42-45,  173 

Hall,  Newman,  158 

Hamilton,  Bob,  177 

Hansen,  Siegfried,  42,  62 

Harold,  Ed,  195 

Harvard  University,  140,  203-205, 

208,  218,  220,  225 
Hasnain,  Connie  Chang,  191-192 
Hasnain,  Ghulam,  191-192 
Haus,  Hermann,  179 
Hauser,  Margaret,  50 
Hawkins,  George,  220 
Helmholz,  Carl,  125-126 
Hewlett-Packard  Company,  191-192 
Heyns,  Roger,  163-164 
Higenbotham,  Sam,  177 
Hirsch,  Bob,  199 

Hoagland,  Albert  S.,  71,  224,  225 
Hoch,  Orrin,  62 

Hodges,  David,  159,  188,  222,  226 
Hopkin,  A.  M. ,  224 
Horning,  Don,  111-113,  131,  222 
Howard  University,  161 
Howe,  Everett  D.,  66,  220,  222 
Hu,  Chenming,  191 
Hughes  Aircraft,  42,  47,  49,  58, 

72;   research  at,  60-68,  176, 

177,  178,  179,  183,  224 
Hughes,  Howard,  67 


Hultgren,  Ralph,  131 
Huskey,  Harry  D.,  128,  129,  167, 
224,  225 

India,  institute  of  technology  in, 

128-129 
Institute  of  Electrical  and 

Electronics  Engineers,  199-200 
Institute  of  Engineering  Research, 

149 

Institute  of  Medicine,  198 
Institute  of  Radio  Engineers,  46 
intercontinental  ballistic 

missiles  (ICBM),  195 
International  Business  Machines 

(IBM),  82,  88,  195,  225 
Ippen,  Erich,  183,  190 

Jamieson,  Bill,  47,  61,  67 
Johnson,  H.  Richard,  62-63 
Jury,  Eli,  224 

Kafitz,  Peter,  55 
Kelly,  John,  129 
Kemper,  John,  145-146 
Kenefake,  Ed,  37-38 
Kennedy,  Van  Dusen,  140,  218 
Kerr,  Clark,  72,  85,  95-96,  108, 

111,  125,  145,  149,  189,  215, 

216,  218,  222,  224,  225 
Kettering,  Charles  F.,  Foundation, 

158 

Klein,  Marvin,  183 
klystrons,  38.  See  also  microwave 

research. 

Knight,  Walter,  103-104 
Knowles,  Jeremy,  208 
Krumhansl,  Jim,  208 
Kuh,  Ernest  S.,  87,  94,  114,  118, 

147,  159,  168,  222,  225 

Lane,  Violetta,  131,  222 

LaPierre,  C.W.  (Jim),  220 

laser  research,  175,  176-177,  182- 

184,  188,  190-193,  203,  208. 

See  also  opto-electronics. 
Lavoo,  Norman,  47 
Lawrence  Berkeley  Laboratory,  184 


270 


Lawrence  Livermore  Laboratory,  26, 

Teller  Tech,  125-127 
Le  Corbeiller,  Phillipe,  140,  218 
Lee,  Sing,  166-167 
Leonberger,  Fred,  202 
Levens,  Alexander,  136 
Lichtenberg,  Alan,  225 
Lieberman,  M.A. ,  226 
Lin,  Weigan,  58 
Litton  Industries,  62 
Lockheed  Corporation,  25 
Lord,  Harold,  47 

Mackay,  John  H.,  Jr.  endowment, 

89-90,  225 
Man-Made  World  project,  157-158, 

167 

Mansfield  Amendment,  78,  188 
Marcovitz,  Nathan,  45,  173 
Mark,  Hans  P.,  117 
Marshall,  Larry,  53,  54 
Martin,  Don,  19,  21-22,  24 
Martin,  William,  22-23 
Maslach,  George,  134,  147,  149, 

151,  156,  164,  222 
Massachusetts  Institute  of 

Technology  (MIT),  52-53,  59,  70, 

80,  89,  92,  104,  128,  132,  134, 

140,  167,  178,  179,  183,  198, 

203-204,  208,  215,  218,  219, 

220,  223,  225 
Massachusetts  Institute  of 

Technology  (MIT)  Radiation 

Laboratory,  25,  45,  46,  60,  74 
Master  Plan  for  Higher  Education, 

California,  216-217 
Matthei,  George,  76 
McArthur,  E.D.,  46-47 
McBride,  Bill,  55 
McFarland,  Thomas,  53,  54,  60,  69, 

78,  223 
McGauhey,  Percy  H.,  115,  116,  127- 

129,  220 

McHenry,  Dean,  165,  167 
Meisling,  Torben,  71,  225 
Meriam,  James  L.,  136 
Messerschmitt,  David,  226 
Meyerson,  Martin,  162 


microwave  research,  klystrons,  38; 
magnetrons,  39,  47;  microwave 
radar  46,  224,  See  also  radar; 
resnatrons,  54,  74-76;  triodes, 
44,  47;  tubes,  38,  43,  44,  47, 
54-55,  62-64,  68,  173,  174, 
176-178,  181,  182-183,  224,  225 

Miles,  Josephine,  169,  170 

minority  hiring,  118-119 

Modesto  Junior  College,  22-24,  30, 
31 

Morton,  Paul,  53,  70-71,  74,  78, 
85-87,  89,  90,  98,  107,  153, 
224,  225 

Mrak,  Emil,  123 

Mueller,  George,  206 

Narayanamurti,  Venky,  202 
National  Academy  of  Engineering, 

198 
National  Academy  of  Sciences,  198- 

199,  201-202,  223 
National  Aeronautics  and  Space 

Administration  (NASA) ,  Apollo 

Program,  196-197,  205-207 
National  Defense  Research  Council 

(NDRC),  52 
National  Institutes  of  Health, 

198-199 
National  Research  Council,  77, 

201-202,  207-208 
National  Science  Foundation,  75, 

77,  155,  157-158,  180,  188, 

197-198,  226,  peer  review,  198- 

199 
Naval  Electronics  Laboratory,  San 

Diego,  54 

Naval  Research  Laboratory,  60,  74 
New  York  University,  220 
nuclear  energy,  safety  of,  198-199 

O'Brien,  Morrough  P.,  54,  58,  60, 
66,  72-75,  78-80,  84-85,  93, 
95-103,  110,  111,  112,  114, 
115,  120,  122,  130,  131-132, 
134-137,  139-140,  144,  146, 
149-150,  215-223,  225-226 


271 


Office  of  Naval  Research,  59-60, 

74-75,  188,  215,  223,  224 
Office  of  Scientific  Research 

(U.S.  Air  Force),  75,  181,  188, 

224 

Ohio  State  University,  129 
Oldham,  William  G.,  98,  226 
Oppenheim,  Lou,  146 
opto-electronics,  68,  173,  182- 

183,  190-193,  202,  204,  225 
Orlob,  Gerald  T.,  123,  128 

Pacific  Gas  &  Electric  Company,  26 
Parker,  Earl  R. ,  96,  98,  101-102, 

120,  134,  149,  216,  222 
patents.  See  University  of 

California. 
Peden,  Irene,  118 
Pederson,  Donald  0.,  86-87,  93-94, 

156,  165,  166,  224-226 
Personick,  Stuart,  202 
Pettit,  Joe,  25,  32-33,  87 
physics,  and  engineering,  174-175, 

219.  See  also  Townes,  Charles. 
Pinochet,  Augusto,  128 
Pister,  Karl,  222 
Pollack,  Martin  A.,  156,  179 
Portis,  Alan  M. ,  181 
Porto,  Sergio,  183 
Princeton  University,  129 
Purdue  University,  129,  220 

quantum  electronics,  181-183,  225 

radar  research,  44-47,  53-55,  59- 

63,  65,  74,  153,  175.  See  also 

microwave  research. 
Ramo,  Simon,  34-35,  39-43,  45,  47- 

50,  61-62,  64,  65,  67,  173-174, 

195,  202-203 
Research  Applied  to  National 

Needs,  Committee  on  (RANN),  197- 

198 
Reukema,  Lester,  27,  28,  53,  54, 

56,  60,  74 
Rice,  Chester,  38 
Robbins,  Theo  Eloise,  43 
Robertson,  Burtis,  53 


Robertson,  Esther,  131 
Rogers,  Don,  177 
Rumsey,  Victor  H.,  87,  152-153, 
224 

Sakrison,  David,  226 

Samuel,  Art,  195 

Sardis,  John,  19,  21-22,  24 

Sato,  Sho,  160 

Saunders,  Robert  M. ,  70,  86,  152, 

223,  225,  226 
Saville,  Thorndyke,  220 
Saxon,  David  S.,  45,  170 
Schaaf,  Samuel  A.,  96,  105-106, 

216 
Schade,  Henry,  78-79,  134,  216, 

222 

Schmidt,  Ron,  183,  190 
Schwarz,  Steve,  177,  184 
Schwinger,  Julian,  45,  173 
Science  and  Public  Policy, 

Committee  on  (COSPUP) ,  198-199 
Scordelis,  Alexander  C.,  129 
Scott,  Herbert,  27,  28,  53,  131 
Seaborg,  Glenn,  100-102,  105-106, 

107-108,  155,  160 
Shaffer,  Lysle,  131-132 
Shank,  Charles  V.,  184-185 
Shell  Oil  Company,  32,  34 
Shen,  Y.  Ron,  191 
Shepard,  Jerry,  197 
Shepard,  Ronald,  115-116 
Shepard,  William  G. ,  195 
Siegman,  Tony,  62-63 
Silver,  Samuel,  59-60,  65-66,  72- 

76,  79-80,  86,  87,  120,  216, 

223-226 

Simmons,  Aleen,  76 
Singer,  Israel,  198 
Singer,  Jerome  (Jay),  181,  184, 

225 
Skidmore,  Owings  &  Merrill,  112- 

113 

Sloan,  Alfred  P.,  Foundation,  158 
Sloan,  David,  54-55,  63,  74,  76, 

176,  223,  224 
Smelser,  Neil,  169 
Smith,  George,  62 


272 


Smith,  Millard,  42,  62 

Smith,  Otto,  70,  223 

Smith,  Steve,  185 

Snow,  C.P.,  140-141,  168 

solid  state  electronics,  86,  205, 

225 
SPICE  [Simulation  Program  with 

Integrated  Circuit  Emphasis], 

86,  224 
Sproul,  Robert  Gordon,  30,  96, 

115,  144-145,  149,  216,  220 
Stanford  University,  25,  32-33, 

52-53,  62,  74,  80,  87,  92,  107, 

116,  151,  165,  167,  178,  179, 
203-204,  208,  223 

Strong,  Edward,  100-101,  107-108, 

155 
Susskind,  Charles,  35,  71,  119, 

121,  177,  224 
systems  theory,  86,  94,  153 

Teare,  Bill,  47 

Teller,  Edward,  125-127,  202-203 

Tenney,  George,  145 

Terman,  Fred,  33,  107,  165-1666 

Thimann,  Kenneth,  167 

Thomas ian,  Aram,  225 

Tien,  Chang-Lin,  106,  117-118,  171 

Tilles,  Abe,  26,  28 

Townes,  Charles,  174-175,  196,  203 

Trivelpiece,  Alan,  225 

Troxell,  George  E.,  27 

Truxal,  John,  157 

Turin,  George  L. ,  117,  226 

Two  Cultures,  The,  140-141,  144 

United  States  Congress,  78,  188, 
198-199 

United  States  Department  of 

Defense,  78,  188,  194-195,  202- 
203 

United  States  Navy  Bureau  of 
Ships,  223 

University  of  California, 

Berkeley,  22-31,  38,  52-60,  63, 
65-83,  82-85,  95-96,  100-108, 
111-112,  127-129,  137,  144-146, 
160-164,  166,  167,  168-172,  215- 


217,  219,  220,  223,  225-226; 
Academic  Senate,  84-85,  96-99, 
103,  120-122,  123,  125,  137- 
138,  151,  162-163,  170,  217; 
buildings,  112-114,  220-221, 
224,  226;  College  of 
Engineering,  See  College  of 
Engineering;  College  of  Letters 
and  Science,  153-154,  218; 
faculty  hiring,  117-122,  148, 
152,  See  also  under  College  of 
Engineering;  Four  Letter  Word 
Committee,  160-162;  Free  Speech 
Movement,  162-163;  Joint 
Services  Electronics  Program, 
223,  226;  Lawrence  Hall  of 
Science,  170;  loyalty  oath,  82, 
163;  patents  in  academic 
research,  81-82,  171-172; 
research  in  computer  sciences, 
70-71,  74,  86,  153-154,  224, 
226;  Richmond  Field  Station, 
112,  115,  221;  Space  Sciences 
Laboratory,  216,  223 

University  of  California  Board  of 
Regents,  62,  75 

University  of  California,  Davis, 
122-126,  131,  133,  145-146, 
185,  203 

University  of  California 
Extension,  151-152 

University  of  California,  Irvine, 
70,  152,  154,  223 

University  of  California,  Los 
Angeles,  22,  61,  63,  70,  119, 
122,  123,  130,  133,  144 

University  of  California, 
Riverside,  165 

University  of  California,  San 
Diego,  153,  154,  167,  169,  203 

University  of  California,  Santa 
Barbara,  76,  123-125,  133,  145, 
202 

University  of  California,  Santa 
Cruz,  151-152,  164-168,  171 

University  of  California 
Systemwide,  President's 
Committee  on  Innovation,  171- 


273 


172;  Water  Resources  Center,  220 
University  of  Hawaii,  203-204 
University  of  Illinois,  70,  87, 

89,  155,  157,  223,  225 
University  of  Michigan,  70,  128 
University  of  Minnesota,  195 
University  of  Pennsylvania,  70 
University  of  Southern  California, 

203-204 
University  of  Utah,  203 

van  der  Pol,  Balthazar,  89,  225 

Van  Duzer,  Theodore,  128,  177,  179 

Varaiya,  Pravin  P.,  162 

Varian  Associates,  32 

Varian,  Russell  H.  and  Sigurd  F., 

38,  43 
Vietnam  War,  78,  188 

Wang,  Shyh,  184,  225 

Water  Resources  Center,  220 

Watkins,  Dean,  62-63,  179 

Weber,  Ernst,  220 

Wehausen,  John  V.,  109 

Wellman,  Harry,  123-124,  220 

Western  Electronics  Manufacturer's 

Association,  151-152 
Westinghouse  Electric  Corporation, 

34,  54 
Whinnery,  Argenta  (sister),  5-6, 

11-13 
Whinnery,  Barbara  (daughter),  211- 

212 
Whinnery,  Carol  (daughter),  15, 

211-212 
Whinnery,  Cathy  (daughter),  211- 

212 
Whinnery,  Edith  Mabel  Bent 

(mother),  3-6,  10-14,  16,  20-21, 

40,  50 
Whinnery,  Irene  (sister),  5-6,  11, 

13,  15,  16,  21 

Whinnery,  John  E.  (grandfather),  1 
Whinnery,  John  R.,  1-227  passim; 

childhood,  6-21;  early  interest 

in  electricity,  2,  7-9,  19-20, 

23;  education,  6,  17-32,  52-59; 

honors,  30-31,  168-170;  poetry, 


7,  14,  15,  35,  39,  41-42, 

Appendix  B.  See  also  under 

College  of  Engineering;  General 

Electric  Company;  Hughes 

Aircraft. 
Whinnery,  Mary  Ann  Fawcett 

(grandmother) ,  1 
Whinnery,  Patricia  Barry  (wife), 

50-51,  66-67,  210-212 
Whinnery,  Ralph  Vincent  (father), 

2-17,  19-21,  50 

Whinnery,  Webster  (uncle),  2-3,  10 
White,  Jim,  25 
White,  William,  46-47 
women  in  engineering,  50-51,  118 
Wong,  Eugene,  226 
Wooldridge,  Dean,  61-62,  64,  67, 

195 
work-study  program,  131-132,  219, 

222 

World  of  Engineering,  The,  118 
World  War  II,  43-46,  50-51,  52, 

53,  57,  65,  69-70,  75,  116, 

175,  215,  223,  226 
Wright  Air  Development  Center,  54, 

76,  79,  224 
Wu,  Xin,  192 

Yadavalli,  Sriramamurti,  59 
Yale  University,  123-125,  203-205 
Yariv,  Ammon,  181,  184 
Yates,  Perry,  145 

Zadeh,  Lotfi,  87,  94,  152-154, 

164,  225,  226 
Zeilinger,  Wil,  177 


February  1996 
Interviews  on  the  History  of  The  University  of  California 

Documenting  the  history  of  the  University  of  California  has  been  a 
responsibility  of  the  Regional  Oral  History  Office  since  the  Office  was 
established  in  1954.  Oral  history  memoirs  with  University-related 
persons  are  listed  below.   They  have  been  underwritten  by  the  UC  Berkeley 
Foundation,  the  Chancellor's  Office,  University  departments,  or  by 
extramural  funding  for  special  projects.   The  oral  histories,  both  tapes 
and  transcripts,  are  open  to  scholarly  use  in  The  Bancroft  Library. 
Bound,  indexed  copies  of  the  transcripts  are  available  at  cost  to 
manuscript  libraries. 

Adams,  Frank,  "Irrigation,  Reclamation,  and  Water  Administration,"  1956, 
491  pp. 

Amerine,  Maynard  A.,  "The  University  of  California  and  the  State's  Wine 
Industry,"  1971,  142  pp.   [UC  Davis] 

Amerine,  Maynard  A.,  "Wine  Bibliographies  and  Taste  Perception  Studies," 
1988,  91  pp.   [UC  Davis] 

Bennett,  Mary  Woods,  "A  Career  in  Higher  Education:   Mills  College 
1935-1974,"  1987,  278  pp. 

Bierman,  Jessie,  "Maternal  and  Child  Health  in  Montana,  California,  the 
U.S.  Children's  Bureau  and  WHO,  1926-1967,"  1987,  246  pp. 

Bird,  Grace,  "Leader  in  Junior  College  Education  at  Bakersfield  and  the 
University  of  California,"  two  volumes,  1978,  342  pp. 

Birge,  Raymond  Thayer,  "Raymond  Thayer  Birge,  Physicist,"  1960,  395  pp. 

Blaisdell,  Allen  C.,  "Foreign  Students  and  the  Berkeley  International 
House,  1928-1961,"  1968,  419  pp. 

Blaisdell,  Thomas  C.,  Jr.,  "India  and  China  in  the  World  War  I  Era;  New 
Deal  and  Marshall  Plan;  and  University  of  California,  Berkeley," 
1991,  373  pp. 

Blum,  Henrik,  (in  process)   Professor  Emeritus,  Health  Policy  &  Planning 

Bowker,  Albert,  "Sixth  Chancellor,  University  of  California,  Berkeley, 
1971-1980;  Statistician,  and  National  Leader  in  the  Policies  and 
Politics  of  Higher  Education,"  1995,  274  pp.  $70 


Brown,  Delmer  M. ,  (in  process)  UC  Berkeley  History  Department 
Chancy,  Ralph  Works,  "Paleobotanist,  Conservationist,"  1960,  277  pp. 

Chao,  Yuen  Ren,  "Chinese  Linguist,  Phonologist,  Composer,  and  Author," 
1977,  242  pp. 

Constance,  Lincoln,  "Versatile  Berkeley  Botanist:   Plant  Taxonomy  and 
University  Governance,"  1987,  362  pp. 

Corley,  James  V.,  "Serving  the  University  in  Sacramento ,"  1969,  143  pp. 
Cross,  Ira  Brown,  "Portrait  of  an  Economics  Professor,"  1967,  128  pp. 

Cruess,  William  V.,  "A  Half  Century  in  Food  and  Wine  Technology,  1967 
122  pp. 

Davidson,  Mary  Blossom,  "The  Dean  of  Women  and  the  Importance  of 
Students,"  1967,  79  pp. 

DeMars,  Vernon,  "A  Life  in  Architecture:  Indian  Dancing,  Migrant  Housing, 
Telesis,  Design  for  Urban  Living,  Theater,  Teaching,"  1992,  592  pp. 

Dennes,  William  R. ,  "Philosophy  and  the  University  Since  1915,"  1970, 
162  pp. 

Donnelly,  Ruth,  "The  University's  Role  in  Housing  Services,"  1970, 
129  pp. 

Ebright,  Carroll  "Ky" ,  "California  Varsity  and  Olympics  Crew  Coach," 
1968,  74  pp. 

Eckbo,  Garrett,  "Landscape  Architecture:  The  Profession  in  California, 
1935-1940,  and  Telesis,"  1993,  103  pp. 

Elberg,  Sanford  S.,  "Graduate  Education  and  Microbiology  at  the 

University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1930-1989,"  1990,  269  pp. 

Erdman,  Henry  E.,  "Agricultural  Economics:  Teaching,  Research,  and 
Writing,  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  1922-1969,"  1971, 
252  pp. 

Esherick,  Joseph,  (in  process)  Professor  Emeritus,  Architecture 

Evans,  Clinton  W. ,  "California  Athlete,  Coach,  Administrator, 
Ambassador,"  1968,  106  pp. 

Foster,  Herbert  B.,  "The  Role  of  the  Engineer's  Office  in  the  Development 
of  the  University  of  California  Campuses,"  1960,  134  pp. 

Gardner,  David  P.,  (in  process)  University  President  Emeritus,  1983-1992 

Gordon,  Walter  A.,  "Athlete,  Officer  in  Law  Enforcement  and 

Administration,  Governor  of  the  Virgin  Islands."  Two  volumes,  1980, 
621  pp. 


Grether,  Ewald  T.,  "Dean  of  the  UC  Berkeley  Schools  of  Business 

Administration,  1943-1961;  Leader  in  Campus  Administration,  Public 
Service,  and  Marketing  Studies;  and  Forever  a  Teacher,"  1993, 
1069  pp. 

Griffiths,  Farnham  P.,  "The  University  of  California  and  the  California 
Bar,"  1954,  46  pp. 

Hagar,  Ella  Barrows,  "Continuing  Memoirs:   Family,  Community, 
University,"  1974,  272  pp. 

Hamilton,  Brutus,  "Student  Athletics  and  the  Voluntary  Discipline,"  1967, 
50  pp. 

Harding,  Sidney  T.,  "A  Life  in  Western  Water  Development,"  1967,  524  pp. 

Harris,  Joseph  P.,  "Professor  and  Practitioner:   Government,  Election 
Reform,  and  the  Votomatic,"  1983,  155  pp. 

Hays,  William  Charles,  "Order,  Taste,  and  Grace  in  Architecture,"  1968, 
241  pp. 

Heller,  Elinor  Raas,  "A  Volunteer  in  Politics,  in  Higher  Education,  and 
on  Governing  Boards,"  1984,  851  pp.   Two  volumes. 

Helmholz,  A.  Carl,  "Physics  and  Faculty  Governance  at  the  University  of 
California  Berkeley,  1937-1990,"  1993,  387  pp. 

Heyman,  Ira  Michael,  (in  process)  Chancellor  Emeritus,  UC  Berkeley 

Heyns,  Roger  W. ,  "Berkeley  Chancellor,  1965-1971:   The  University  in  a 
Turbulent  Society,"  1987,  180  pp. 

Hildebrand,  Joel  H.,  "Chemistry,  Education,  and  the  University  of 
California,"  1962,  196  pp. 

Huff,  Elizabeth,  "Teacher  and  Founding  Curator  of  the  East  Asiatic 

Library:   from  Urbana  to  Berkeley  by  Way  of  Peking,"  1977,  278  pp. 

Huntington,  Emily,  "A  Career  in  Consumer  Economics  and  Social  Insurance," 
1971,  111  pp. 

Hutchison,  Claude  B.,  "The  College  of  Agriculture,  University  of 
California,  1922-1952,"  1962,  524  pp. 

Jenny,  Hans,  "Soil  Scientist,  Teacher,  and  Scholar,"  1989,  364  pp. 

Johnston,  Marguerite  Kulp,  and  Mixer,  Joseph  R.,  "Student  Housing, 
Welfare,  and  the  ASUC,"  1970,  157  pp. 

Jones,  Mary  C.,  "Harold  S.  Jones  and  Mary  C.  Jones,  Partners  in 
Longitudinal  Studies,"  1983,  154  pp. 

Joslyn,  Maynard  A.,  "A  Technologist  Views  the  California  Wine  Industry," 
1974,  151  pp. 


Kasimatis,  Amandus  N.,  "A  Career  in  California  Viticulture,"  1988,  54  pp. 
[UC  Davis] 

Kendrick,  James  B.,  Jr.  "From  Plant  Pathologist  to  Vice  President  for 
Agricultural  and  Natural  Resources,  University  of  California, 
1947-1986,"  1989,  392  pp. 

Kingman,  Harry  L.,  "Citizenship  in  a  Democracy, "1973,  292  pp. 
[Stiles  Hall,  University  YMCA] 

Roll,  Michael  J.,  "The  Lair  of  the  Bear  and  the  Alumni  Association,  1949- 
1993,"  1993,  397  pp. 

Kragen,  Adrian  A.,  "A  Law  Professor's  Career:  Teaching,  Private  Practice, 
and  Legislative  Representation,  1934  to  1989,"  1991,  333  pp. 

Kroeber-Quinn,  Theodora,  "Timeless  Woman,  Writer  and  Interpreter  of  the 
California  Indian  World,"  1982,  453  pp. 

Landreth,  Catherine,  "The  Nursery  School  of  the  Institute  of  Child 

Welfare  of  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,"  1983,  51  pp. 

Langelier,  Wilfred  E.,  "Teaching,  Research,  and  Consultation  in  Water 
Purification  and  Sewage  Treatment,  University  of  California  at 
Berkeley,  1916-1955,"  1982,  81  pp. 

Lehman,  Benjamin  H. ,  "Recollections  and  Reminiscences  of  Life  in  the  Bay 
Area  from  1920  Onward,"  1969,  367  pp. 

Lenzen,  Victor  F.,  "Physics  and  Philosophy,"  1965,  206  pp. 

Leopold,  Luna  B.,  "Hydrology,  Geomorphology,  and  Environmental 

Policy:   U.S.  Geological  Survey,  1950-1972,  and  UC  Berkeley,  1972- 
1987,"  1993,  309  pp. 

Lessing,  Ferdinand  D.,  "Early  Years,"   1963,  70  pp. 
[Professor  of  Oriental  Languages] 

McGauhey,  Percy  H. ,  "The  Sanitary  Engineering  Research  Laboratory: 
Administration,  Research,  and  Consultation,  1950-1972,"  1974, 
259  pp. 

McCaskill,  June,  "Herbarium  Scientist,  University  of  California,  Davis," 
1989,  83  pp.   [UC  Davis] 

McLaughlin,  Donald,  "Careers  in  Mining  Geology  and  Management,  University 
Governance  and  Teaching,"  1975,  318  p. 

Merritt,  Ralph  P.,  "After  Me  Cometh  a  Builder,  the  Recollections  of  Ralph 
Palmer  Merritt,"  1962,  137  pp.   [UC,  Rice  and  Raisin  Marketing] 

Metcalf,  Woodbridge,  "Extension  Forester,  1926-1956,"  1969,  138  pp. 
Meyer,  Karl  F.,  "Medical  Research  and  Public  Health,"  1976,  439  pp. 
Miles,  Josephine,  "Poetry,  Teaching,  and  Scholarship,"  1980,  344  pp. 


Mitchell,  Lucy  Sprague,  "Pioneering  in  Education,"  1962,  174  pp. 

Morgan,  Elmo,  "Physical  Planning  and  Management:  Los  Alamos,  University 
of  Utah,  University  of  California,  and  AID,  1942-1976",   1992, 
274  pp. 

Neuhaus,  Eugen,  "Reminiscences:   Bay  Area  Art  and  the  University  of 
California  Art  Department,"  1961,  48  pp. 

Newell,  Pete,  (in  process).   Former  Cal  basketball  coach  and  athletic 
director. 

Newman,  Frank,  (in  process).   Professor  Emeritus  of  Law,  Boalt  Hall. 

Neylan,  John  Francis,  "Politics,  Law,  and  the  University  of  California," 
1962,  319  pp. 

Nyswander,  Dorothy  B.,  "Professor  and  Activist  for  Public  Health 
Educaiton  in  the  Americas  and  Asia,"  1994,  318  pp. 

O'Brien,  Morrough  P.,  "Dean  of  the  College  of  Engineering,  Pioneer  in 
Coastal  Engineering,  and  Consultant  to  General  Electric,"  1989, 
313  pp. 

Ogg,  Robert  Danforth,  "Business  and  Pleasure:   Electronics,  Anchors,  and 
the  University  of  California,"  1989,  157  pp. 

Olmo,  Harold  P.,  "Plant  Genetics  and  New  Grape  Varieties,"  1976,  183  pp. 
[UC  Davis] 

Olney,  Mary  McLean,  "Oakland,  Berkeley,  and  the  University  of  California, 
1880-1895,"  1963,  173  pp. 

Ough,  Cornelius,  "Recollections  of  an  Enologist,  University  of 
California,  Davis,  1950-1990,"  1990,  66  pp.   [UC  Davis] 

Pepper,  Stephen  C.,  "Art  and  Philosophy  at  the  University  of  California, 
1919-1962,"  1963,  471  pp. 

Porter,  Robert  Langley,  "Physician,  Teacher  and  Guardian  of  the  Public 
Health,"  1960,  102  pp.    [UC  San  Francisco] 

Reeves,  William,  "Arbovirologist  and  Professor,  UC  Berkeley  School  of 
Public  Health,"  1993,  686  pp. 

Revelle,  Roger,  "Oceanography,  Population  Resources  and  the  World,"  1988. 
[Available  through  Archives,  Scripps  Institute  of  Oceanography, 
University  of  California,  San  Diego,  La  Jolla,  CA  92093.] 

Richardson,  Leon  J.,  "Berkeley  Culture,  University  of  California 

Highlights,  and  University  Extension,  1892-1960,"  1962,  248  pp. 

Robb,  Agnes  Roddy,  "Robert  Gordon  Sproul  and  the  University  of 
California,"  1976,  134  pp. 


Rossbach,  Charles  Edwin,  "Artist,  Mentor,  Professor,  Writer,"  1987, 
157  pp. 

Schnier,  Jacques,  "A  Sculptor's  Odyssey,"  1987,  304  pp. 

Scott,  Geraldine  Knight,  "A  Woman  in  Landscape  Architecture  in 
California,  1926-1989,"  1990,  235  pp. 

Selvin,  Herman  F.,  "The  University  of  California  and  California  Law  and 
Lawyers,  1920-1978,"  1979,  217  pp. 

Shields,  Peter  J.,  "Reminiscences  of  the  Father  of  the  Davis  Campus," 
1954,  107  pp.   [UC  Davis] 

Shurtleff,  Roy  L.,  "The  University's  Class  of  1912,  Investment  Banking, 
and  the  Shurtleff  Family  History,"  1982,  69  pp. 

Sproul,  Ida  Wittschen,  "The  President's  Wife,"  1981,  347  pp. 

Stern,  Milton  R. ,  "The  Learning  Society:  Continuing  Education  at  NYU, 
Michigan,  and  UC  Berkeley,  1946-1991,"  1993,  292  pp. 

Stevens,  Frank  C.,  "Forty  Years  in  the  Office  of  the  President, 
University  of  California,  1905-1945,"  1959,  175  pp. 

Stewart,  George  R. ,  "A  Little  of  Myself."  Author  and  UC  Professor  of 
English,  1972,  319  pp.   [Author  and  UC  Professor  of  English] 

Stewart,  Jessie  Harris,  "Memories  of  Girlhood  and  the  University,"  1978, 
70  pp. 

Stripp,  Fred  S.,  Jr.,  "Fred  Stripp:   University  Debate  Coach,  Berkeley 
Civic  Leader,  and  Pastor,"  1990,  75  pp. 

Strong,  Edward  W. ,  "Philosopher,  Professor,  and  Berkeley  Chancellor, 
1961-1965",  1992,  530  pp. 

Struve,  Gleb  (in  process)  Professor  of  Slavic  Languages  and  Literature. 

Taylor,  Paul  Schuster 

Volume  I:   "Education,  Field  Research,  and  Family,"  1973,  342  pp. 
Volume  II  and  Volume  III:   "California  Water  and  Agricultural 
Labor,"  1975,  519  pp. 

Thygeson,  Phillip,  "External  Eye  Disease  and  the  Protor  Foundation," 
1988,  321  pp.   [UC  San  Francisco] 

Towle,  Katherine  A.,  "Administration  and  Leadership,"  1970,  369  pp. 

Townes,  Charles  H.,  "A  Life  in  Physics:  Bell  Telephone  Laboratories  and 

WWII,  Columbia  University  and  the  Laser,  MIT  and  Government  Service; 
California  and  Research  in  Astrophysics,"  1994,  691  pp. 

Underhill,  Robert  M. ,  "University  of  California:   Lands,  Finances,  and 
Investments,"  1968,  446  pp. 


Vaux,  Henry  J.,  "Forestry  in  the  Public  Interest:   Education,  Economics, 
State  Policy,  1933-1983,"  1987,  337+  pp. 

Wada,  Yori,  "Working  for  Youth  and  Social  Justice:  The  YMCA,  The 

University  of  California,  and  the  Stulsaft  Foundation,"  1991,  203 
pp. 

Waring,  Henry  C.,  "Henry  C.  Waring  on  University  Extension,"  1960, 
130  pp. 

Weaver,  Harold  F.,  (in  process)  Professor  Emeritus  of  Astronomy 

Wellman,  Harry,  "Teaching,  Research  and  Administration,  University  of 
California,  1925-1968,"  1976,  259  pp. 

Wessels,  Glenn  A.,  "Education  of  an  Artist,"  1967,  326  pp. 

Westphal,  Katherine,  "Artist  and  Professor,"  1988,  190  pp.   [UC  Davis] 

Whinnery,  John,  "Researcher  and  Educator  in  Electromagnetics,  Microwaves, 
and  Optoelectronics,  1935-1995;  Dean  of  the  College  of  Engineering, 
UC  Berkeley,  1959-1963,"  1996,  273  pp. 

Williams,  Arleigh,  "Dean  of  Students  Arleigh  Williams:   The  Free  Speech 
Movement  and  the  Six  Years'  War,  1964-1970,"  1990,  329  pp. 

Williams,  Arleigh  and  Betty  H.  Neely:   "University  Administrators  Recall 
Origin  of  Physically  Disabled  Students'  Residence  Program,"  1987, 
41  pp. 

Wilson,  Garff  B.,  "The  Invisible  Man,  or,  Public  Ceremonies  Chairman  at 
Berkeley  for  Thirty-Five  Years,"  1981,  442  pp. 

Winkler,  Albert  J.,  "Viticultural  Research  at  UC  Davis,  1921-1971,"  1973, 
144  pp. 

Witter,  Jean  C.,  "The  University,  the  Community,  and  the  Lifeblood  of 
Business,"  1968,  109  pp. 

Woods,  Baldwin  M. ,  "University  of  California  Extension,"  1957,  102  pp. 

Woolman,  Marjorie  J.  (in  process).   Secretary  Emeritus  of  the  Regents, 
University  of  California. 

Wurster,  William  Wilson,  "College  of  Environmental  Design,  University  of 
California,  Campus  Planning,  and  Architectural  Practice,"  1964, 
339  pp. 


MULTI- INTERVIEWEE  PROJECTS 

"Blake  Estate  Oral  History  Project,"  1988,  582  pp.   Architects,  landscape 
architects,  gardeners,  presidents  of  UC  document  the  history  of  the 
UC  presidential  residence.   Includes  interviews  with  Mai  Arbegast, 
Igor  Blake,  Ron  and  Myra  Brocchini,  Toichi  Domoto,  Eliot  Evans,  Tony 
Hail,  Linda  Haymaker,  Charles  Hitch,  Flo  Holmes,  Clark  and  Kay  Kerr, 
Gerry  Scott,  George  and  Helena  Thacher,  Walter  Vodden,  and  Norma 
Wilier. 

"Centennial  History  Project,  1954-1960,"  329  pp. 

Includes  interviews  with  George  P.  Adams,  Anson  Stiles  Blake,  Walter 
C.  Blasdale,  Joel  H.  Hildebrand,  Samuel  J.  Holmes,  Alfred  L. 
Kroeber,  Ivan  M.  Linforth,  George  D.  Louderback,  Agnes  Fay  Morgan, 
and  William  Popper. 

"Thomas  D.  Church,  Landscape  Architect,"  two  volumes,  1978,  803  pp. 

Volume  I:   Includes  interviews  with  Theodore  Bernardi,  Lucy  Butler, 
June  Meehan  Campbell,  Louis  De  Monte,  Walter  Doty,  Donn  Emmons, 
Floyd  Gerow,  Harriet  Henderson,  Joseph  Howland,  Ruth  Jaffe,  Burton 
Litton,  Germane  Milano,  Miriam  Pierce,  George  Rockrise,  Robert 
Royston,  Geraldine  Knight  Scott,  Roger  Sturtevant,  Francis  Violich, 
and  Harold  Watkin. 

Volume  II:   Includes  interviews  with  Maggie  Baylis,  Elizabeth  Roberts 
Church,  Robert  Glasner,  Grace  Hall,  Lawrence  Halprin,  Proctor 
Mellquist,  Everitt  Miller,  Harry  Sanders,  Lou  Schenone,  Jack 
Stafford,  Goodwin  Steinberg,  and  Jack  Wagstaff. 

"Dental  History  Project,  University  of  California,  San  Francisco,"  1969, 
1114  pp. 

Includes  interviews  with  Dickson  Bell,  Reuben  L.  Blake,  Willard  C. 
Fleming,  George  A.  Hughes,  Leland  D.  Jones,  George  F.  McGee,  C.E. 
Rutledge,  William  B.  Ryder,  Jr.,  Herbert  J.  Samuels,  Joseph  Sciutto, 
William  S.  Smith,  Harvey  Stallard,  George  E.  Steninger,  and  Abraham 
W.  Ward. 

"Julia  Morgan  Architectural  History  Project,"  two  volumes,  1976,  621  pp. 

Volume  I:   "The  Work  of  Walter  Steilberg  and  Julia  Morgan,  and  the 
Department  of  Architecture,  UCB,  1904-1954." 

Includes  interviews  with  Walter  T.  Steilberg,  Robert  Ratcliff, 
Evelyn  Paine  Ratcliff,  Norman  L.  Jensen,  John  E.  Wagstaff,  George  C. 
Hodges,  Edward  B.  Hussey,  and  Warren  Charles  Perry. 

Volume  II:   "Julia  Morgan,  Her  Office,  and  a  House." 

Includes  interviews  with  Mary  Grace  Barren,  Kirk  0.  Rowlands,  Norma 
Wilier,  Quintilla  Williams,  Catherine  Freeman  Nimitz,  Polly  Lawrence 
McNaught,  Hettie  Belle  Marcus,  Bjarne  Dahl,  Bjarne  Dahl,  Jr.,  Morgan 
North,  Dorothy  Wormser  Coblentz,  and  Flora  d'llle  North. 

"The  Prytaneans:  An  Oral  History  of  the  Prytanean  Society  and  its 

Members. " 

Volume  I:  "1901-1920,"  1970,  307  pp. 
Volume  II:  "1921-1930,"  1977,  313  pp. 
Volume  III:  "1931-1935,"  1990,  343  pp. 


"Robert  Gordon  Sproul  Oral  History  Project."  Two  volumes,  1986,  904  pp. 
Includes  interviews  with  Horace  Albright,  Stuart  LeRoy  Anderson, 
Katherine  Bradley,  Dyke  Brown,  Natalie  Cohen,  Paul  A.  Dodd,  May 
Dornin,  Richard  E.  Erickson,  Walter  S.  Frederick,  David  P.  Gardner, 
Vernon  Goodin,  Marion  Sproul  Goodin,  Louis  Heilbron,  Clark  Kerr, 
Adrian  Kragen,  Robert  S.  Johnson,  Mary  Blumer  Lawrence,  Donald 
McLaughlin,  Dean  McHenry,  Stanley  E.  McCaffrey,  Kendric  and  Marion 
Morrish,  William  Penn  Mott,  Jr.,  Herman  Phleger,  John  B.  deC.  M. 
Saunders,  Carl  Sharsmith,  John  Sproul,  Robert  Gordon  Sproul,  Jr., 
Wallace  Sterling,  Wakefield  Taylor,  Robert  Underbill,  Garff  Wilson, 
and  Pete  L.  Yzaquirre. 

"UC  Black  Alumni  Oral  History  Project." 

Broussard,  Allen  (in  process) 

Gordon,  Walter  A.,  "Athlete,  Officer  in  Law  Enforcement  and 

Administration,  Governor  of  the  Virgin  Islands."  Two  volumes,  1980, 

621  pp. 

Jackson,  Ida,  "Overcoming  Barriers  in  Education",  1990,  80  pp. 
Patterson,  Charles,  (in  process) 
Pittman,  Tarea  Hall,  "NAACP  Official  and  Civil  Rights  Worker",  1974, 

159  pp. 

Poston,  Marvin,  "Making  Opportunities  in  Vision  Care",  1989,  90  pp. 
Rice,  Emmett  J.  "Education  of  an  Economist:  From  Fulbright  Scholar  to  the 

Federal  Reserve  Board,  1951-1979",  1991,  92  pp. 
Rumford,  William  Byron,  "Legislator  for  Fair  Employment,  Fair  Housing, 

and  Public  Health",  1973,  152  pp. 
Williams,  Archie,  "The  Joy  of  Flying:  Olympic  Gold,  Air  Force  Colonel, 

and  Teacher,"  1993,  85  pp. 

Wilson,  Lionel,  "Attorney,  Judge,  Oakland  Mayor",  1992,  104  pp. 
"The  Women's  Faculty  Club  of  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley, 

1919-1982,"  1983,  312  pp. 

Includes  interviews  with  Josephine  Smith,  Margaret  Murdock,  Agnes 

Robb,  May  Dornin,  Josephine  Miles,  Gudveig  Gordon-Britland, 

Elizabeth  Scott,  Marian  Diamond,  Mary  Ann  Johnson,  Eleanor  Van  Horn, 

and  Katherine  Van  Valer  Williams. 

Class  of  1931  Endowment  Series,  "University  of  California,  Source  of 
Community  Leaders"  (Outstanding  Alumni) 

Bennett,  Mary  Woods  ('3D,  "A  Career  in  Higher  Education:   Mills  College 

1935-1974,"  1987,  278  pp. 
Browne,  Alan  K.  ('31),  "'Mr.  Municipal  Bond1:   Bond  Investment 

Management,  Bank  of  America,  1929-1971,"  1990,  325  pp. 
Devlin,  Marion  ('3D,  "Women's  News  Editor:  Vallejo  Times-Herald,  1931- 

1978,"  1991,  157  pp. 
Hassard,  H.  Howard  ('3D,  "The  California  Medical  Association,  Medical 

Insurance,  and  the  Law,  1935-1992,"   1993,  228  pp. 
Kay,  Harold  ('3D,  "A  Berkeley  Boy's  Service  to  the  Medical  Community  of 

Alameda  County,  1935-1994,"   1994,  104  pp. 
Kragen,  Adrian  A.  ('3D,  "A  Law  Professor's  Career:  Teaching,  Private 

Practice,  and  Legislative  Representative,  1934  to  1989,"  1991, 

333  pp. 
Peterson,  Rudolph  A.,  ('25),  "A  Career  in  International  Banking  with  the 

Bank  of  America,  1936-1970,  and  the  United  Nations  Development 

Program,  1971-1975,"   1994,   408  pp. 
Stripp,  Fred  S.,  Jr.  ('32),  "University  Debate  Coach,  Berkeley  Civic 

Leader,  and  Pastor,"  1990,  75  pp. 
Heilbron,  Louis  ('27),  Attorney,  in  process. 


ANN  LAGE 


B.A.,  and  M.A. ,  in  History,  University  of  California, 
Berkeley. 

Postgraduate  studies,  University  of  California, 
Berkeley,  American  history  and  education. 

Chairman,  Sierra  Club  History  Committee,  1978-1986;  oral 

history  coordinator,  1974-present;  Chairman,  Sierra  Club 
Library  Committee,  1993-present. 

Interviewer /Editor,  Regional  Oral  History  Office,  in  the 
fields  of  natural  resources  and  the 
environment,  university  history,  California 
political  history,  1976-present . 

Principal  Editor,  assistant  office  head,  Regional  Oral  History 
Office,  1994-present. 


13 


U.  C.  BERKELEY  LIBRARIES 


CDSTflbbfl^E 


